https://app.getpocket.com/read/1130170373

> In a post last year, we laid out the human lifespan visually. By years:

# Pocket - The Tail End

[In a post last year](https://waitbutwhy.com/2014/05/life-weeks.html), we laid
out the human lifespan visually. By years:

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2FYears.jpg)

By months:

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2FMonths.jpg)

And by weeks:

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2FWeeks.jpg)

While working on that post, I also made a days chart, but it seemed a bit much,
so I left it out. But fuck it.

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2FDays-large-e1449796562773.jpg)

The days chart blows my mind as much as the weeks chart. Each of those dots is
only a single Tuesday or Friday or Sunday, but even a lucky person who lives to
90 will have no problem fitting every day in their life on [one sheet of
paper](https://28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/A-90-Year-Life-in-Days.pdf).

But since doing the Life in Weeks post, I’ve been thinking about something
else.

Instead of measuring your life in units of time, you can measure it in
activities or events. To use myself as an example:

I’m 34, so let’s be super optimistic and say I’ll be hanging around drawing
stick figures till I’m
90.[1](https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/12/the-tail-end.html#footnote-1-4579) If so,
I have a little under 60 winters left:

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2FWinters.png)

And maybe around 60 Superbowls left:

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2FSuperbowls.png)

The ocean is freezing and putting my body into it is a bad life experience, so
I tend to limit myself to around one ocean swim a year. So as weird as it
seems, I might only go in the ocean 60 more times:

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2FOcean.png)

Not counting Wait But Why research, I read about five books a year, so even
though it feels like I’ll read an endless number of books in the future, I
actually have to choose only 300 of all the books out there to read and accept
that I’ll sign off for eternity without knowing what goes on in all the rest.

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2Fbooks.png)

Growing up in Boston, I went to Red Sox games all the time, but if I never move
back there, I’ll probably continue at my current rate of going to a Sox game
about once every three years—meaning this little row of 20 represents my
remaining Fenway visits:

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2Fsox.png)

There have been eight US presidential elections during my lifetime and about 15
to go. I’ve seen five presidents in office and if that rate continues, I’ll see
about nine more.

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2Fpresidents.png)

I probably eat pizza about once a month, so I’ve got about 700 more chances to
eat pizza. I have an even brighter future with dumplings. I have Chinese food
about twice a month and I tend to make sure six dumplings occurs each time, so
I have a fuckton of dumplings to look forward to:

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2Fdumplings-small.png)

But these things aren’t what I’ve been thinking about. Most of the things I
just mentioned happen with a similar frequency during each year of my life,
which spreads them out somewhat evenly through time. If I’m around a third of
my way through life, I’m also about a third of my way through experiencing the
activity or event.

What I’ve been thinking about is a really important part of life that, unlike
all of these examples, isn’t spread out evenly through time—something whose
\[already done / still to come\] ratio doesn’t at all align with how far I am
through life:

Relationships.

I’ve been thinking about my parents, who are in their mid-60s. During my first
18 years, I spent some time with my parents during at least 90% of my days. But
since heading off to college and then later moving out of Boston, I’ve probably
seen them an average of only five times a year each, for an average of maybe
two days each time. 10 days a year. About 3% of the days I spent with them each
year of my childhood.

Being in their mid-60s, let’s continue to be super optimistic and say I’m one
of the incredibly lucky people to have both parents alive into my 60s. That
would give us about 30 more years of coexistence. If the ten days a year thing
holds, that’s 300 days left to hang with mom and dad. Less time than I spent
with them in any one of my 18 childhood years.

When you look at that reality, you realize that despite not being at the end of
your life, you may very well be nearing the end of your time with some of the
most important people in your life. If I lay out the total days I’ll ever spend
with each of my parents—assuming I’m as lucky as can be—this becomes starkly
clear:

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2015%2F12%2Fparents-small.png)

It turns out that when I graduated from high school, I had already used up 93%
of my in-person parent time. I’m now enjoying the last 5% of that time. We’re
in the tail end.

It’s a similar story with my two sisters. After living in a house with them for
10 and 13 years respectively, I now live across the country from both of them
and spend maybe 15 days with each of them a year. Hopefully, that leaves us
with about 15% of our total hangout time left.

The same often goes for old friends. In high school, I sat around playing
hearts with the same four guys about five days a week. In four years, we
probably racked up 700 group hangouts. Now, scattered around the country with
totally different lives and schedules, the five of us are in the same room at
the same time probably 10 days each decade. The group is in its final 7%.

So what do we do with this information?

Setting aside my secret hope that technological advances will let me live to
700, I see three takeaways here:

**1) Living in the same place as the people you love matters.** I probably have
10X the time left with the people who live in my city as I do with the people
who live somewhere else.

**2) Priorities matter.** Your remaining face time with any person depends
largely on where that person falls on your list of life priorities. Make sure
this list is set by you—not by unconscious inertia.

**3) Quality time matters.** If you’re in your last 10% of time with someone
you love, keep that fact in the front of your mind when you’re with them and
treat that time as what it actually is: precious.

[

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2F28oa9i1t08037ue3m1l0i861-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2017%2F01%2FPDF-Button.png)



](https://gum.co/wbw-tail-end)

If you’re into Wait But Why, sign up for the **[Wait But Why email
list](https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/12/the-tail-end.html#)** and we’ll send you
the new posts right when they come out.

If you’re interested in supporting Wait But Why, **[here’s our
Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/waitbutwhy)**.

**More things to reflect on:**

**[Taming the Mammoth: Why You Should Stop Caring What Other People
Think](https://waitbutwhy.com/2014/06/taming-mammoth-let-peoples-opinions-run-life.html)**

**[Life is a Picture, But You Live in a
Pixel](https://waitbutwhy.com/2013/11/life-is-picture-but-you-live-in-pixel.html).**
So obvious, so hard to remember.

[**Religion for the
Nonreligious**](https://waitbutwhy.com/2014/10/religion-for-the-nonreligious.html)**.**
Everyone needs a growth framework.