> If you don't deal with your demons they'll move into the cellar and lift weights
> You are what you pretend to be. -- Kurt Vonnegut
> The standard pace is for chumps. -- Derek Sivers
> Don't be a donkey (from the fable that can't decide between the water and hay). -- Derek Sivers
> Authenticity is overrated. I want a professional to show up. -- Seth Godin
> We wouldn't accept our boss talking to us like we talk to ourselves. -- Seth Godin
> Keep doing the work with generosity until the lizard brain stops censoring you. -- Seth Godin
> No one gets plumber's block. They just do plumbing. -- Tim Ferris
> Always do the simplest thing first
> Ask yourself first if you have a right to have an opinion. -- Ray Dali
> Get 1 percent better each day. -- Atomic Habits
> A systems-first mentality beats a goal-oriented mind-set. -- Atomic Habits
> The purpose of setting goals is to win the game. The purpose of building systems is to continue playing the game. -- Atomic Habits
> It’s easy not to practice the guitar when it’s tucked away in the closet. -- Atomic Habits
> We don’t choose our earliest habits, we imitate them. -- Atomic Habits
> Surround yourself with people who have the habits you want to have. -- Atomic Habits
> Reframe your habits to highlight their benefits rather than their drawbacks. -- Atomic Habits
> To master a habit, start with repetition, not perfection. -- Atomic Habits
> Master the habit of showing up. -- Atomic Habits
> Professionals stick to the schedule; amateurs let life get in the way. -- Atomic Habits
> Happiness is simply the absence of desire. -- Atomic Habits
> Suffering is the space between craving a change in state and getting it. -- Atomic Habits
> Mindfulness (meditation) improves our brains. -- Brain Rules 
> Be very social. -- Brain Rules
> Read 3+ hours per day. -- Brain Rules
> Intensely learn something new, especially a new language. -- Brain Rules
> Take dance lessons. -- Brain Rules
> Practice gratitude and mindfulness. -- Brain Rules
> Flood your mind with nostalgic memories. . -- Brain Rules
> Remember the human
> What am I not saying that needs to be said? What am I saying that’s not being heard? What’s being said that I’m not hearing?. -- Jerry Colonna
> All beings own their own karma. Their happiness is dependent on their actions not my wishes for them. -- Sharon Salzburg
> There is no elevator to success. You have to take the stairs. -- Julie Rice
../quotes.mkd
> Spend enough time in a state of frenetic shallowness and you permanently reduce your capacity to perform deep work. -- Deep Work
> A succession of mediocre singers does not add up to a single outstanding performance. -- Deep Work
> Deliberate practice requires: Attention and Feedback. -- Deep Work
> Eudaimonia (a state in which you’re achieving your full human potential). -- Deep Work
> Minimize the amount of willpower necessary to maintain unbroken concentration. -- Deep Work
> Donald Knuth: I have been a happy man ever since January 1, 1990, when I no longer had an email address. Email is a wonderful thing for people whose role in life is to be on top of things. But not for me; my role is to be on the bottom of things. What I do takes long hours of studying and uninterruptible concentration. -- Deep Work
> Neal Stephenson: All of my time and attention are spoken for - several times over. Please do not ask for them. -- Deep Work
> Waiting for inspiration to strike is a terrible, terrible plan. -- Deep Work
> Schedule every minute of your day. -- Deep Work
> Two things determine how your life turns out: the quality of your decisions, and luck. Recognize the difference between the two. -- Thinking In Bets
> Hindsight bias is the tendency, after an outcome is known, to see the outcome as having been inevitable. -- Thinking In Bets
> Life is more like poker. You could make the smartest, most careful decision and still have it blow up in your face. -- Thinking In Bets
> Saying I don’t know is a necessary step toward enlightenment. -- Thinking In Bets
> Blind-spot bias is worse the smarter you are. -- Thinking In Bets
> Experience can be an effective teacher, but only some students listen to their teachers. -- Thinking In Bets
> Agree to be open-minded to those who disagree eith you, give credit where it’s due, and take responsibility where it’s appropriate,. -- Thinking In Bets
> There’s not much purpose in a poker story if the point is about something you had no control over, like bad luck. -- Thinking In Bets
> People are more willing to offer their opinion when the goal is to win a bet rather than get along with people in a room. -- Thinking In Bets
> Telling someone how a story ends encourages them to be resulters, to interpret the details to fit that outcome. -- Thinking In Bets
> Skepticism is about approaching the world by asking why things might not be true rather than why they are true. -- Thinking In Bets
> Imagine yourself looking back from the destination and figure how you got there. Remembering the future is a better way to plan for it. -- Thinking In Bets
> Negative visualization makes you more likely to achieve your goals. -- Thinking In Bets
> Radical Candor, or Ruinous Empathy, or Obnoxious Aggression, or Manipulative Incenserity?
> Be a kind human
> The ability to to become self reflective, to pause, quiet the mind a bit, and turn attention back on itself — Jim dethmer
> Ask yourself after a conversation: was there anywhere I was more interested in control, approval, and survival, than I was in learning? Jim dethmer
> During a conversation just pause for a breath and ask yourself: in this moment am I genuinely interested in generating a win for all outcome. Or have I constricted such that the most important thing is protecting my ego Jim dethmer
> The antidote to fear is not courage. It’s acceptance. Jim dethmer
> Almost all life is lived from the triangle of victim villain hero — Jim dethmer 
> Unless people are equally valuing EQ (with IQ) the best decisions are being made. Jim dethmer
> Unless you’re aligned on your agreements you’ll circle around drama. Jim dethmer
> Don’t be a victim of people, circumstances and conditions. Jim dethmer
> It takes an unbielevable amount of energy to resist reality. Jim dethmer 
> Feelings past 90 seconds if I don’t feed it and drop into my body. Jim dethmer
> I can only be empathetic with someone else’s emotions as much as I’m comfortable with my emotion. Jim dethmer. 
> Are you willing to take responsibility for creating your reality. Jim dethmer. 
> When you get feedback don’t ask if it’s true. Ask HOW it is true (of the person and 3 others). Jim dethmer. 
> It’s not usually good advice to be _emotional_. It is good advice to express emotion in a professial way. Sheila heen 
> To have good discussio ask: how do you think I came to my position and what evidence can I present to change your mind — David pakman 
> Don’t say I hate. Say It’s not for me
> Almost everything will work again if you unplug it for a few minutes, including you. — Anne Lamott
> When we come down to the root of the matter, we see that [geniuses] differ from ordinary men less in the character of their attention than in the nature of the objects upon which it is successively bestowed. -- William James
> Never expect you'll get a No. Always put your name in. -- Kevin Systrom
> Do the thing. Don't just write articles about starting. -- Kevin Systrom
> At the end of your life when you look back at this, who do you want to have been? How do you want people to have thought of you?
> To have a conversation you to have to first learn to listen. -- Julie Rice
> It's easy to hide behind a grandiose idea. It's hard to hide when you have a small plan. -- Seth Godin
> Ask 3 times: Is there more?
> There is no elevator to success. You have to take the stairs. -- Julie Rice
> You can fail at what you don't love, so you might as well do what you do love. -- Jim Carrey
> Life doesn't happen to you, it happens for you. How do I know this? Because I'm making sound. -- Jim Carrey
> Systems with slack are more resilient. The few extra minutes of time aren’t wasted, the same way that a bike helmet isn’t wasted if you don’t have a crash today. That buffer will save the day, sooner or later. -- Seth Godin
> What do you despise? By this are you truly known. -- Frank Herbert,
> I will have to remember ‘I am here today to cross the swamp, not to fight all the alligators.’ — From The Art of Possibility 
> To begin you must study the end. -- Jose Raul Capablanca
> What goals can I achieve by making marginal adjustments. -- Stephen Duneier https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TQMbvJNRpLE
> We have to enforce without force. -- https://www.ted.com/talks/ian_dunbar_on_dog_friendly_dog_training
> Jiu Jitsu Perspective. -- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=STAqTwaojOM
> it’s always in your favor to introduce yourself. -- The Fine Art of Small Talk
> FORM: family, occupation, recreation and miscellaneous. -- asking open ended questions from The Fine Art of Small Talk
.
> Getting angry is not a strategy. It’s a distraction. -- https://gen.medium.com/if-youre-angry-you-re-part-of-the-problem-not-the-solution-d50a74b119cb
> Luck is what happens when preparation meets opportunity
> Whatever you fear most has no power – it is your fear that has the power.
> You will continue to suffer if you have an emotional reaction to everything that is said to you. True power is sitting back and observing things with logic. True power is restraint. If words control you that means everyone else can control you. Breathe and allow things to pass. -- Warren Buffett
> Act that you use humanity, whether in your own person or in the person of any other, always at the same time as an end, never merely as a means. -- Immanuel Kant
> It is not the critic who counts. Not the man who points out how the strong man stumbles, or where the doer of deeds could have done them better. The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood. Who strives valiantly. Who errs, who comes short again and again, because there is no effort without error and shortcoming. But who does actually strive to do the deeds. Who knows great enthusiasms, the great devotions. Who spends himself in a worthy cause. Who at the best knows in the end the triumph of high achievement, and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly, so that his place shall never be with those cold and timid souls who neither know victory nor defeat. -- Theodore Roosevelt
> Girls place more emphasis on the feedback they receive from their teachers than boys do. -- Under Pressure by Lisa Damour
> It’s the process of exploration itself that fascinates us, not the places we explore. -- Red Moon - Kim Stanley Robinson
> He’ll say ‘explain that to me’ thirty different times. Or ‘could you explain that more, in English?’ Because once you do that, there’s a few things you learn. For a start, you figure out if they even know what they’re talking about. -- The Big Short - Michael Lewis
> Writing a check separates a commitment from a conversation. -- Warren Buffett
> The more he studied Buffett, the less he thought Buffett could be copied; indeed, the lesson of Buffett was: To succeed in a spectacular fashion you had to be spectacularly unusual. -- The Big Short - Michael Lewis
> He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself without lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light without darkening me. -- Thomas Jefferson
> Accept your past without regrets. Handle your present with confidence. Face your future without fear. -- Hell Divers - Nicholas Sansbury Smith
> "The first principle is that you must not fool yourself and you are the easiest person to fool." -- RICHARD FEYNMAN -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "If you start believing in your greatness, it is the death of your creativity." -- Marina Abromovic  -- Ego Is The Enemy
> help us be: **Humble** in our aspirations. **Gracious** in our success. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> **Ego is stolen. Confidence is earned.** -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "no adornment so becomes you as modesty, justice, and self-control; for these are the virtues by which, as all men are agreed, the character of the young is held in restraint." -- Isocrates -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "Abhor flatterers as you would deceivers; for both, if trusted, injure those who trust them." -- Isocrates -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "Be affable in your relations with those who approach you, and never haughty; for the pride of the arrogant even slaves can hardly endure" -- Isocrates -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "Be slow in deliberation, but be prompt to carry out your resolves" -- Isocrates -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "Best thing which we have in ourselves is good judgment." -- Isocrates -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "Constantly train your intellect, for the greatest thing in the smallest -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "This above all: to thine own self be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man. Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!" -- Shakespeare, Polonius to his son Laertes -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "Talent is only the starting point." -- Irving Berlin -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "Those who know do not speak. Those who speak do not know." -- LAO TZU -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "Tiger, one day you will come to a fork in the road, and you're going to have to make a decision about which direction you want to go. If you go that way you can be somebody. You will have to make compromises and you will have to turn your back on your friends. But you will be a member of the club and you will get promoted and you will get good assignments. Or you can go that way and you can do something something for your country and for your Air Force and for yourself. If you decide you want to do something, you may not get promoted and you may not get the good assignments and you certainly will not be a favorite of your superiors. But you won't have to compromise yourself. You will be true to your friends and to yourself. And your work might make a difference. To be somebody or to do something. In life there is often a roll call. That's when you will have to make a decision." -- Forty-Second Boyd (fighter pilot) -- Ego Is The Enemy
> An education can't be "hacked"; there are no shortcuts besides **hacking it every single day**. If you don't, they drop you.  -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "It is impossible to learn that which one thinks one already knows" -- Epictetus  -- Ego Is The Enemy
> Purpose is about pursuing something outside yourself as opposed to pleasuring yourself (passion) -- Ego Is The Enemy
> It'd be far better if you were intimidated by what lies ahead humbled by its magnitude and determined to see it through regardless. Leave passion for the amateurs. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> **Make other people look good and you will do well**. Keep your head down, they say, and serve your boss. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> When someone doesn't reckon you with the seriousness that you'd like, the impulse is to correct them.  Instead, you must do nothing. Take it. **Eat it** until you're sick. Endure it.  Quietly brush it off and **work harder**. Play the game. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> **There's no one to perform for**. There is just work to be done and lessons to be learned, in all that is around us. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "A proud man is always looking down on things and people; and, of course, as long as you are looking down, you cannot see something that is above you." -- C. S. LEWIS -- Ego Is The Enemy
> Don't boast. There's nothing in it for you. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "You can't build a reputation on what you're going to do" -- Henry Ford -- Ego Is The Enemy
> Is it ten thousand hours or twenty thousand hours to mastery? The answer is that it doesn't matter. **There is no end zone**. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> **Make it so you don't have to fake it** -- Ego Is The Enemy
> Pick up a book on a topic you know next to nothing about. Put yourself in rooms where you're the least knowledgeable person. Change your mind. Change your surroundings. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> Have "frighteningly ambitious" ideas, but explains, "The way to do really big things seems to be to start with deceptively small things." -- Paul Graham  -- Ego Is The Enemy
> **Ego needs honors in order to be validated**. Confidence, on the other hand, is able to wait and focus on the task at hand regardless of external recognition. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "You're becoming who you are going to be and so you might as well not be an -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "What matters to an active man is to do the right thing; whether the right thing comes to pass should not bother him." -- GOETHE -- Ego Is The Enemy
> You will be unappreciated. You will be sabotaged. You will experience surprising failures. Your expectations will not be met. You will lose. You will fail. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "A team, like men, must be brought to its knees before it can rise again." -- Vince Lombardi -- Ego Is The Enemy
> In the end, the only way you can appreciate your progress is to **stand on the edge of the hole you dug for yourself**, look down inside it, and smile fondly at the bloody claw prints that marked your journey up the walls. -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "He who fears death will never do anything worthy of a living man" -- Seneca -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "They cannot degrade Frederick Douglass. The soul that is within me no man can degrade. I am not the one that is being degraded on account of this treatment, but those who are inflicting it upon me." -- Frederick Douglas -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "People learn from their failures. Seldom do they learn anything from success." -- Harold Geneen -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "See much, study much, suffer much, that is the path to wisdom." -- old Celtic saying -- Ego Is The Enemy
> "Every day the dust comes back. Every day we must sweep." -- Daniele Bolelli -- Ego Is The Enemy
> **But for the grace of God go I. But for the grace of God, that could be any of us** -- Ego Is The Enemy
> I don't start counting until it starts to hurt -- Mohammad Ali, when asked how many situps he does
> Arnold Schwarzenegger motivation -- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eWJVvNptHZ4
> When you have a Plan B, you're taking energy away from Plan A -- Arnold Schwarzenegger
> Don't be afraid of failing because there's nothing wrong with failing -- Arnold Schwarzenegger
