https://slab.com/blog/jeff-bezos-writing-management-strategy/

> There's probably no technology company that values the written word and
> produces written output quite as much as Amazon. At Amazon, meetings to
> present ideas start not with PowerPoint slides but with narratively
> structured memos.

# How Jeff Bezos Turned Narrative into Amazon's Competitive Advantage - CEO
Writing - The Blog Of Slab

_For the first piece in our series [How CEOs
Write](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/blog/categories/ceo-writing/),
we talked about how Tesla's missteps and failures can be traced back to three
critical mistakes that Elon Musk makes in his writing, tweeting, and emails.
[Check it out
here](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/blog/elon-musk-writing-mistakes/)._

There's probably no technology company that values the written word and
produces written output quite as much as Amazon.

At Amazon, meetings to present ideas start not with PowerPoint slides but with
narratively structured memos.

Years have proverbial themes—like the Year of Getting Our House In Order—that
guide the Amazon's priorities and decision-making for that year.

And every year, the company's chief executive, Jeff Bezos, writes a long annual
letter to his shareholders—the only such investor letter, besides Warren
Buffett's letters for Berkshire Hathaway, to take on official “must read”
status for not just Silicon Valley but Wall Street as well.

Bezos is Amazon's chief writing evangelist, and his advocacy for the art of
long-form writing as a motivational tool and idea-generation technique has been
ordering how people think and work at Amazon for the last two decades—most
importantly, in how the company creates new ideas, how it shares them, and how
it gets support for them from the wider world.

## **Creating Good Ideas: Clear Thinking Is Clear Writing**

At Amazon, instead of asking his senior leaders to brainstorm great ideas for
the company, Bezos asks them to submit six-page, dense, narratively structured
memos.

Writing memos forces his team to think through their ideas in high-resolution
detail. Instead of wasting time with impromptu brainstorming sessions, writing
memos ensures that group discussion is based on the critical review of the
relevant ideas, not on hypotheticals.

Most importantly, it makes it impossible to hide any logical inconsistencies in
the ideas that people put out there. By imposing a rigorous, standardized
template on the process of idea generation at Amazon, Jeff Bezos raises the bar
and raises the quality of his team's thinking.

 [![memo](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/ac82377f2797e25da36de33a44d4cdd92372b157/ff4c4/static/6b8ee14adde8d7d761989afff9d416e6/e7b61/memo.png
 "memo")](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/static/6b8ee14adde8d7d761989afff9d416e6/e7b61/memo.png) 

_The email in which Jeff Bezos officially banned the use of PowerPoint at
Amazon and insisted that people with ideas come to meetings with “well
structured, narrative text.”_

Bezos's obsession with memo writing became law at Amazon on June 9, 2004.

In the now-famous email, he explained that no Amazon team members would be
allowed to bring PowerPoint presentations or even lists of bullet points as
documentation for meetings: all ideas were to emerge from densely written,
narrative memos:

“The reason writing a good 4 page memo is harder than 'writing' a 20 page
powerpoint is because the narrative structure of a good memo forces better
thought and better understanding of what's more important than what, and how
things are related,” he writes, “Powerpoint-style presentations somehow give
permission to gloss over ideas, flatten out any sense of relative importance,
and ignore the interconnectedness of ideas.”

[![porter](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/29b01402b503529a58808ae90f2f96d9ef8cad4e/e391e/static/4c811fdea2257fb10498fb0f82392206/3d653/porter.png
"porter")](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/static/4c811fdea2257fb10498fb0f82392206/3341c/porter.png) 

_The memo-style of presentation is designed—contra forms like PowerPoint—to
make presenting new ideas difficult for the presenter but easier for their
audience._

Businesses need a repeatable process that helps generate good ideas
consistently. Many companies do this by brainstorming—holding meetings for all
involved to kick in ideas as a way to spur creativity by getting a diverse set
of minds together.

But [research has
shown](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/01/30/groupthink) not only that
humans are better at thinking creatively as individuals rather than as groups
but also that inviting criticism and analysis is beneficial to creativity—not
harmful, as some brainstorming advocates would claim.

A 2003 experiment at the University of California–Berkeley, conducted by
Charlan Nemeth, set out to examine the effects of different kinds of group idea
generation on idea creativity. One group was asked to answer a problem with no
other instructions; one group was asked to brainstorm, with no criticism of
others' ideas allowed; and one group was asked to debate one another. The last
group outperformed the other two by a significant margin when it came to coming
up with diverse solutions.

At Amazon, the memo format allows every meeting where ideas are presented to
turn into a deep debate of the idea's relative costs and merits. This kind of
criticism is even built into the memos themselves. Each memo is designed to be
a full logical argument, complete with a [reflexive defense of potential
objections](https://www.quora.com/Amazon-com-product/How-are-the-six-page-narratives-structured-in-Jeff-Bezos-S-Team-meetings):

1. The point or the objective being discussed
2. How teams have attempted to handle this issue in the past
3. How the presenter's attempt differs
4. Why Amazon should care (i.e., what's in it for the company?)

If you’ve ever been in a brainstorm meeting, you've probably noticed that a few
people can dominate the conversation. The nature of the format rewards quantity
over quality and breadth over depth. The result is a lot of ideas from a few
people that were all thought of more or less on a whim, many of which might not
withstand even the slightest scrutiny.

Amazon involves the group, but only once the ideas are out there. Research
tells us that while individuals are better at developing ideas, [groups are
much more efficient than individuals at recognizing the best ideas and figuring
out how to implement
them](https://www.inc.com/teresa-torres/why-brainstorming-doesnt-work-and-what-to-do-instead.html).

Often, the even bigger challenge, once the group figures out that they want to
implement an idea, is getting that idea to spread among the wider team. Writing
a six-page memo and thinking through every dimension of a new idea for the
company is one thing; getting everyone in a company of hundreds of thousands to
understand and live that idea is a different kind of problem entirely.

## **Spreading Good Ideas: Amazon Original Proverbs**

Inside Amazon, Jeff Bezos's use of proverbs to get his entire company aligned
behind goals is legendary.

By packaging his ideas about how Amazon should work into short, simple, and
easy-to-remember phrases—“It is always Day 1,” “process as proxy,”
“high-velocity decision making,” and others—Bezos ensures that his ideas not
only spread and get understood but also become an influential part of how
people actually act inside Amazon.

 [![day1](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/45e323248082dbd91c3c94b7a87e5be2ce157da2/d91a8/static/f5797e05dec38af17b1a277450b7aec3/085e8/day1.jpg
 "day1")](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/static/f5797e05dec38af17b1a277450b7aec3/5e53b/day1.jpg) 

_The “Day 1” metaphor first appears in one of Jeff Bezos's first shareholder
letters—it was so influential inside Amazon that at Amazon's new Seattle HQ,
Bezos named the building that he worked in “Day 1.”_

Getting employees at all levels and in all departments on the same page often
poses a difficult problem for senior leadership in companies. Messages get
ignored or diluted and obscured as they pass from person to person and team to
team. Instead of having a unified direction, the company then ends up with
different departments prioritizing different things for different reasons.

 [![weiner](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/76183b8956f99b18922971bcc4f373ad27ed9525/2ca11/static/4e2ef8ddec46740b2b03fa5e03aaa02f/908c7/weiner.png
 "weiner")](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/static/4e2ef8ddec46740b2b03fa5e03aaa02f/908c7/weiner.png) 

_All CEOs have to repeat themselves. But with the right kind of writing, you
can improve comprehension and reduce the amount of time you have to spend
explaining yourself._ (Source:
[Lighthouse](https://getlighthouse.com/blog/power-of-repetition-successful-leaders/))

Packaging a message into pithy, aphoristic form is not only likely to make it
more memorable; it's also likely to make it more powerful. It's less likely to
be miscommunicated as it spreads from person to person, and it's more likely to
encourage the kinds of behaviors you want it to encourage.

At Amazon, the year that the company first approached $1 billion in revenue was
the year they chose to title “Getting Our House In Order,” or GOHIO.

Being concerned that Amazons processes wouldn't hold up to the pressure of the
projected increase in volume they expected that year, Bezos knew that the focus
of the company had to be on improving internal structure and process.

 [![gohio](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/8a4a279cf907fedca41ae6b68ca21fe64375e728/f5252/static/ba00a32a329d2a3c68011003e5c75fb2/3d653/gohio.png
 "gohio")](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/static/ba00a32a329d2a3c68011003e5c75fb2/3cab1/gohio.png) 

\[[source](http://www.eugenewei.com/blog/2017/5/11/jpeg-your-ideas)\]

GOHIO became the pithy, memorable calling card of that entire year: a constant
reminder that, as the company grew, everyone needed to be thinking about how
the company would handle the increased scale of customer service complaints,
web traffic, logistics issues, and more.

But probably the most influential proverb inside Amazon is the idea of Day 1.

 [![1997](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/eb904047e03c532551e2178dd478ab8262467307/52b75/static/f1600049c5d87d2dc9ce5bcadc378f14/3d653/1997.png
 "1997")](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/static/f1600049c5d87d2dc9ce5bcadc378f14/3e1b6/1997.png) 

_Jeff Bezos's first annual shareholder letter as CEO of Amazon, sent at the end
of 1997._

 [![2016](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/441576bed04de1b760c2b8cf9b42456211146566/0b6ed/static/86996b142a89dc7084a41f0bfc9c767e/3d653/2016.png
 "2016")](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/static/86996b142a89dc7084a41f0bfc9c767e/c26a1/2016.png) 

_Jeff Bezos's 2016 annual shareholder letter, revisiting the idea of Day 1 and
expanding on it._

The most important message a CEO needs to spread throughout a company is about
culture: what types of mind-sets are valued, and what types of behaviors are
encouraged. At Amazon, the entire cultural code is communicated in a two-word
phrase: “Day 1.”

For Bezos, “Day 1” harks back to the first years of Amazon, when it truly was
“Day 1” for the internet. With the internet age just beginning in earnest,
Bezos knew Amazon was at an exciting juncture. There were no established
playbooks for success on the internet. There were few successes to point to at
all. All the company could do was try to deliver as much value as possible to
their customers. Bezos's instinct was that focusing on that, over the long
term, would bring about the best possible results.

In his 2016 letter to shareholders, Bezos reviewed some of the forces that
could lead a company to forget that it was in “Day 1” and lose that
customer-centricity, and discussed how Amazon [has held those forces
off](https://ir.aboutamazon.com/static-files/e01cc6e7-73df-4860-bd3d-95d366f29e57).
In it, he expounds at length about what Day 1 still means to
Amazon—customer-centricity, resisting proxies, always looking for ways to
deliver values to customers.

Few memos can guide an organization's thinking and behavior for nearly two
decades straight. The only ideas that can survive for that long are the ones
that are packaged memorably enough—and memorably packaging his ideas in just a
few choice words has long been one of Bezos's strengths.

It's a strength that, clearly, he's used not just internally but also in his
communications with the public—and most importantly, with the public
shareholders of Amazon Inc.

## **Getting Support for Good Ideas: The Language of a Leader**

Bezos's main form of communication with Amazon's shareholders and customers
comes in the form of an annual letter. In these letters, Bezos explains
Amazon's year, talks about what the company has learned and been challenged
with, and gives hints about the future.

One reason Bezos's letters are interesting is that, for the majority of its
life as a public company, Amazon was not the darling of Wall Street, as it is
today. For much of its lifetime, Amazon has been criticized for refusing to
turn a profit, for being too ambitious, for spreading itself too thin, and for
various other reasons. In his letters, Bezos hasn't shied away from his
critics—ironically, by addressing his critics head-on and at times professing
his controversial decisions as Amazon's chief executive, he has built up more
trust among the true believers in his shareholder pool and removed doubters.

 [![1997
 2](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/76982221bb0a23502d1aedc3f179766cb66e1a2f/57850/static/06a302e45778faa0a164783d8cd8dc71/3d653/1997-2.png
 "1997
 2")](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/static/06a302e45778faa0a164783d8cd8dc71/76478/1997-2.png)
 [![1997
 3](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/8baa3462e367802abc05ff80eea8d3568b4e4a4e/f5b75/static/23c180c137285fd3f2f19e8208bd4acb/0ff20/1997-3.png
 "1997
 3")](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/static/23c180c137285fd3f2f19e8208bd4acb/0ff20/1997-3.png) 

_From Bezos's first shareholder letter in 1997._

In his first public letter to shareholders, Bezos outright told his new
investors that he would “make investment decisions in light of long-term market
leadership considerations rather than short-term profitability considerations
or short-term Wall Street reactions.” For tech-crazy shareholders in the late
'90s hoping to see exponential, immediate returns on their new stock
investment, this wasn't the most reassuring message to hear. And Amazon wasn't
struggling by any means—by that point, the company was already generating about
$148 million a year in revenue and had grown by [838% year over
year](https://www.cbinsights.com/research/bezos-amazon-shareholder-letters/).
Many Wall Street analysts bucked at this clear defiance of shareholders'
supposed supremacy, but Bezos was confident that the gains Amazon would make
from a long-term strategy would far eclipse the losses from a few Wall Street
speculators selling the stock early.

Another habit of Bezos throughout his shareholder letters is not holding back
about his and Amazon's failures, and professing that Amazon would keep seeking
out opportunities to boldly experiment regardless of how many failures they
faced.

In his very first letter he wrote, “We will make bold rather than timid
investment decisions where we see a sufficient probability of gaining market
leadership advantages. Some of these investments will pay off, others will
not.” In his 2017 letter, Bezos acknowledged the ”billions of dollars’ worth of
failures” they'd had ”along the way”.

The shareholders who balked at this strategy, thanks to this letter, had the
opportunity to leave the company behind—but those who chose to stick it out and
hold on ultimately benefited.

Part of it is Bezos's style and his use of language—cool, calculated, and
logically articulate. Like an air traffic controller talking down a scared
pilot, Bezos doesn't shy away from discussing disaster and failure and
explaining his controversial ideas for how to run a company. Instead, he
explains them thoughtfully and makes you understand from his point of view.

It's also not uncommon to find Bezos strengthening and moving his points
forward by posing questions to himself that a skeptical reader might bring up.
In mirroring and then addressing readers' concerns, Bezos makes the tone of his
writing all the more calm and confident by showing that he knows the issue
inside and out and can refute any doubts.

 [![2015](https://d33wubrfki0l68.cloudfront.net/e0a64dc0f199bebc2b9e9b241ba0449bd270f079/a6eab/static/ea2e3aa3b0b1f51b4ddd88ae56fc2c8d/3d653/2015.png
 "2015")](moz-extension://d4d32931-708e-7c48-b79c-fd4fe0ff43f6/static/ea2e3aa3b0b1f51b4ddd88ae56fc2c8d/f00f9/2015.png) 

The question Bezos poses in the introduction of his 2015 letter, “Is it only
coincidence that two such dissimilar offerings grew so quickly under one roof?”
challenges the assumption upon which his previous point was supported: that the
success of Amazon and Amazon Web services was by design rather than
coincidence. The act of posing the question in itself indicates that Bezos has
thought deeply about the information and is confident in what he is saying.

## How Amazon Really Wins

Amazon and Jeff Bezos have become reference points for business leaders of all
types looking for guidance on how to create and manage an innovative company.
While CEOs and managers are quick to adopt Bezos’s ideas and put his best
practices to work, few are likely to adopt the most influential and important
practice inside Amazon itself: writing.

It's not exciting or sexy, but as Jeff Bezos and Amazon have proved over the
last two decades, the same skills involved in writing clearly, logically, and
memorably are the same kinds of skills needed to build a company that is
constantly able to deliver value to customers and reinvent itself.