https://app.getpocket.com/read/2786342982

> No one has enough friends. And if that's not reason enough to be likable, we
> tend to do business and build professional and relationships with people we
> like. We're instinctively drawn to people who are modest, agreeable, polite,
> kind ... in short, to people who are genuinely likable.

# Are You Exceptionally Likable? 9 Reasons People Decide They Like You

![](https://pocket-image-cache.com//filters:no_upscale()/https%3A%2F%2Fpocket-image-cache.com%2Fdirect%3Fresize%3Dw2000%26url%3Dhttps%253A%252F%252Fwww.incimages.com%252Fuploaded_files%252Fimage%252F970x450%252Fgetty_511618259_186076.jpg)

No one has enough
[friends](https://www.inc.com/logan-chierotti/going-into-business-with-a-friend-the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly.html?cid=search).
And if that's not reason enough to be likable, we tend to do business and build
professional and
[relationships](https://www.inc.com/entrepreneurs-organization/the-human-element-how-strong-relationships-lead-to-business-success.html?cid=search)
with people we like. We're instinctively drawn to people who are modest,
agreeable, polite, kind ... in short, to people who are genuinely likable.

How do people decide whether they like you, especially once they've gotten to
know you a little better?

The answer often lies in what [likable
people](https://www.inc.com/andrew-thomas/10-verbal-skills-of-the-most-likable-people.html?cid=search)
_don't_ do.

## 1. They don't talk a lot.

I know that sounds odd, since friendly people tend to be gregarious and
outgoing. And there's certainly nothing wrong with that — but there's a big
difference between friendly and likable.

Likable people already know what _they_ know. They want to know what _you_
know. So they ask questions. They ask for details. They care about what you
think, and they show it by listening.

That makes you feel important. That makes you feel likable. (As well you
should, because you are.)

And that makes you like them for making you feel that way.

## 2. They don't blame.

Friends make mistakes. Employees don't meet expectations. Vendors don't deliver
on time. It's easy to blame other people for our problems.

But we are also to blame. Maybe we didn't provide enough training. Maybe we
didn't build in enough of a buffer. Maybe we asked for too much, too soon.

Taking responsibility when things go wrong instead of blaming others isn't
masochistic, it's empowering — because then we focus on doing things better, or
smarter, the next time.

And when we get better or smarter, we're also more likable.

As long as...

## 3. They don't try to impress.

No one likes us for our clothes, our cars, our possessions, our titles, or our
accomplishments. Those are all "things." People may like our things — but that
doesn't mean they like us.

Sure, superficially they might seem to, but superficial is also insubstantial,
and a relationship that is not based on substance is not a real relationship.

The only way to form genuine relationships is to stop trying to impress ... and
start being yourself.

## 4. They don't interrupt.

Interrupting isn't just rude. When we interrupt someone, what we're really
saying is, "I'm not listening to you so I can understand what _you're_ saying;
I'm listening to you so I can decide what _I_ want to say."

Want people to like you? Listen to what they say. Focus on what they say. Ask
questions to make sure you understand what they say.

They'll love you for it — and you'll love how that makes you feel.

## 5. They don't complain.

Our words have power, especially over ourselves. Whining about our problems
makes us feel worse, not better.

If something is wrong, don't waste time complaining. Put that effort into
making the situation better. Unless you want to whine about it forever,
eventually you'll have to do that. So why waste time? Do it now.

Don't talk about what's wrong. Talk about how you'll make things better, even
if that conversation is only with yourself.

And do the same with your friends or colleagues. Don't just be the shoulder
they cry on.

Friends don't let friends whine. Friends help their friends make their lives
better.

## 6. They aren't controlling.

At work, you may be the boss. You may be in charge. The buck may stop with you.

Everywhere else, the only thing you really control is you. People who try to
control other people — to tell them what they should do, what they should
think, what they should feel — they've decided that their goals, their dreams,
or even just their opinions are more important than everyone else's.

People like people who help. Don't tell someone else what to do. Ask them how
you can help them do what _they_ want to do.

They won't just like you for it. They'll _love_ you for it.

## 7. They don't criticize.

Maybe you are more educated. Maybe you are more experienced. Maybe you've been
around more blocks and climbed more mountains and vanquished more dragons.

That doesn't make you smarter, or better, or more insightful.

That just makes you _you_: unique, matchless, one of a kind, but in the end,
just you.

And just like everyone else.

Every person is different: not better, not worse, just different. Appreciate
the differences instead of the shortcomings and you'll see people — and
yourself — in a better light.

And that will help them see themselves in a better light.

## 8. They don't preach.

People who criticize also tend to preach. And judge.

The higher you rise and the more you accomplish, the more likely you are to
think you know everything — and to tell people everything you think you know.

When you speak with more finality than foundation, people may hear you — but
they don't listen.

Want to be instantly likable? Be the person who has accomplished really cool
things...but manages to make other people feel like _they_ are the ones who
have accomplished really cool things.

## 9. They don't dwell on the past.

The past is valuable. We should definitely learn from our mistakes.

And then we should let them go.

Easier said than done? It depends on your focus. When something bad happens to
you, see that as a chance to learn something you didn't know. When another
person makes a mistake, see that as an opportunity to be kind, forgiving, and
understanding.

The past is just training; it doesn't define you. Think about what went wrong,
but only in terms of how you will make sure that, next time, you will get it
right.

Optimism — rational, reasoned, justifiable optimism — is contagious.

And very, very likable.