# The Easyway to Stop Smoking

*Allen Carr and Damian O'Hara*

The nicotine trap is the most subtle, sinister trap that man and nature have
combined to devise.

## CHAPTER 1 THE WORST NICOTINE ADDICT I EVER MET

The slavery of having to go through life systematically destroying my own body
and paying through the nose for the privilege.

‘Why should quitting be difficult?’

There was no physical pain. It was all in the mind.

Not only is life just as enjoyable without them but it is infinitely more so.
Incredibly, better health and a vastly improved financial position are the
least of those gains.

There are only two reasons for failure with my method:

    Failure to Carry Out Instructions.

not to try cutting down or using substitutes,

    Failure to Understand.

if you think smoking is ‘just a habit’, ask yourselves why other habits, some
of them extremely enjoyable ones, are easy to break, yet a habit that tastes
awful, costs us a fortune and kills us is so difficult.

## CHAPTER 2 THE EASYWAY

with the right frame of mind, it is not only easy, but also incredibly
enjoyable to stop smoking.

when we are smoking a cigarette, we look at it and wonder what on earth we are
doing: it is only when we can’t smoke that the cigarette becomes precious or
desirable.

**the fear** that smokers suffer when confronted with the prospect of having to
stop.

95% of such quit attempts end in failure for the following reasons:
- By focusing on the disadvantages of smoking we are addressing the wrong issue.
- be focused on why we smoke, not why we shouldn’t smoke.

Some of the things we use to motivate us to abstain do make us want to quit,
but some of them also make us want to smoke.

showing a throat cancer sufferer continuing to smoke through a hole in her
throat, provokes an emotional response based around the fear and anxiety that
the same might happen to you. This in turn creates stress and the smoker’s
first response to stress is to want to light a cigarette.

It perpetuates the myth that the smoker is sacrificing something or depriving
himself of something when he stops.

sense of deprivation makes us feel miserable and vulnerable, which in turn
makes the cigarette appear desirable.

ask ourselves the following questions:
1. What does the cigarette really do for me?
2. Do I really enjoy it?
3. Do I really need to go through life paying through the nose just to stick
   these things in my mouth and suffocate myself?

`there are NO advantages whatsoever to smoking.`

Nowadays even smokers themselves regard it as antisocial.

## CHAPTER 3 WHY IS IT DIFFICULT TO STOP?

All smokers, including our friends in the smoker’s rights groups, would love to
stop smoking.

All smokers intuitively feel that something evil has taken possession of them.

the problem is not explaining why it is easy to stop; it’s understanding why we
believe it has to be so difficult.

The only reason we begin to smoke is because of the influence of the thousands
of people already doing it.

Yet every one of them wishes they had never started in the first place.

systematically suffocate ourselves,

congest our lungs with cancer-triggering tars

poison every cell of our bodies with the hundreds of toxic chemicals

increasingly starve every muscle and organ of oxygen,

become more and more lethargic.

lifetime of bad breath, stained teeth, filthy ashtrays, vile-smelling hair,
clothes

and furniture and standing alone outside, banished to the sidewalks even in
sub-zero temperatures.

It is a lifetime of slavery.

‘Why am I doing this?’

when you are doing it you wish you weren’t, and that only seems desirable when
you are not doing it?

And what do we get out of it? ABSOLUTELY NOTHING!

the actual withdrawal symptoms from nicotine are so mild (see Chapter 6) that
most smokers go through their whole smoking lives without ever realizing they
are drug addicts.

Some say that it’s the taste and smell of cigarettes that keep us smoking.

They are filthy, disgusting objects.

Smokers would rather smoke old rope than not smoke at all.

‘It is something to do with my hands!’ So, why light it?

‘It is oral satisfaction.’ So, why light it?

‘It is the feeling of the smoke going into my lungs.’ An awful
feeling—replacing oxygen with poison—it is called suffocation.

What the smoker is really saying here is that the cigarette creates a
distraction that allows us, for a moment or two, to forget we are bored.

How is it possible that a drug which provides a distraction at 9 a.m. can
miraculously remove distractions at 9:30 a.m.? It can’t.

How can a drug that relaxes you or relieves stress also stimulate you?

The cigarette just doesn’t do any of the things we tell ourselves it does.

If cigarettes relaxed us and helped to relieve stress then smokers would be
more relaxed and less stressed than non-smokers.

If cigarettes helped us to get going and helped us concentrate, then smokers
would be more energetic and would enjoy enhanced brain function.

Some say they do it for social reasons, because their friends do it. But it
doesn’t make sense when we are fully-grown, independent adults.

Most smokers who think about it eventually come to the conclusion that it is
just a habit.

We make and break habits every day of our lives,

US I need to drive on the right. So I break my UK driving ‘habit’ and
immediately acquire a new ‘habit’ with hardly any aggravation whatsoever.

smoking is not a habit: IT IS NICOTINE ADDICTION!

HOW NICE IT IS TO BE A NON-SMOKER!

## CHAPTER 4 THE SINISTER TRAP

Smoking is the most subtle, sinister trap that man and nature have ever
combined to devise.

One of the most tragic aspects of smoking is how hard we have to work in order
to become hooked.

because that first cigarette tastes so awful, our young minds are reassured
that we could never become hooked on something so disgusting,

we think that because we are not enjoying them we can stop whenever we want to.
But by that stage we are already hooked.

Our bodies tell us in no uncertain terms—GET THIS POISON OUT OF ME!

that perfectly stress-free time never arrives.

We tend to confuse responsibility with stress.

smoking actually causes you to become more nervous, stressed and far less
relaxed than non-smokers.

why do we find it difficult to stop? In order to answer this question we first
need to know why we smoke.

## CHAPTER 5 WHY WE SMOKE

Most of us started smoking for largely stupid reasons, usually involving a
degree of peer pressure,

No smoker truly understands why he or she smokes. If they did, they would stop
immediately and effortlessly.

The actual reason why smokers continue to smoke is a subtle combination of the
factors I will elaborate on in the next two chapters. They are:

1. NICOTINE ADDICTION 
2. BRAINWASHING

## CHAPTER 6 NICOTINE ADDICTION

NICOTINE ADDICTION

**Just one cigarette to become hooked**

One drag of one cigarette is enough for former smokers to get hooked again.

a small dose of nicotine that acts more rapidly than the dose of heroin

1971, a Philip Morris executive wrote: `The cigarette should be conceived not
as a product but as a package. The product is nicotine. Think of the cigarette
pack as a storage container for a day’s supply of nicotine. Think of a
cigarette as a dispenser for a dose unit of nicotine.`

There is enough nicotine in each cigarette to make the average smoker feel the
need to smoke about every forty-five minutes.

this explains why most smokers smoke around twenty cigarettes per day.

These pangs are, in fact, mainly mental and are caused by the illusion that the
smoker is depriving himself of his pleasure or crutch.

There is no physical pain in the withdrawal from nicotine.

It is merely a slightly empty, restless feeling, the feeling that something
isn’t quite right,

The feeling of ‘relief’ is really just the ending of the state of tension that
was created by the previous cigarette.

the only reason why anybody continues to smoke, whether they are a ‘casual’ or
heavy smoker, is to feed that metaphorical ‘little monster’.

the saddest thing about smoking: the only ‘enjoyment’ a smoker gets from a
cigarette is temporary relief from the discomfort created by the previous one.
All the smoker is looking for is the state of peace, tranquility and confidence
that they had before they started smoking in the first place.

the only ‘enjoyment’ a smoker gets from a cigarette is temporary relief from
the discomfort created by the previous one.

What we are really enjoying is not the feeling of normality, but the ending of
the aggravation.

**little monster**

The whole business of smoking is like forcing yourself to wear tight shoes just
to get the pleasure of taking them off.

it’s that smokers are less happy, more stressed and less relaxed when they
can’t smoke.

three main reasons why smokers find it difficult to perceive cigarettes in this
way.

massive brainwashing telling us that smokers receive immense pleasure from
smoking

physical withdrawal from nicotine is so mild, just a slightly empty, insecure
feeling, we don’t think of cigarettes in the same way as we think of other
drugs.

It’s when you are not smoking that you suffer that empty feeling. When you
light up, it disappears, and we give the cigarette the credit for this.

What we forget is that withdrawing from the previous cigarette created that
empty feeling in the first place!

would you conclude that shooting up with heroin relieves panic, or would you
think that heroin withdrawal creates it?

The main reason that smokers find it difficult to quit is that they believe
that they are giving up a genuine pleasure or crutch. It is absolutely
essential to understand that there is nothing to ‘give up’.

Smoking doesn’t suppress the appetite; it’s just that withdrawal feels like
hunger

Sadly, the truth is that all they have done is to remove the slight feeling of
discomfort caused by the previous cigarette.

the point is that the non-smoker didn’t feel any discomfort to begin with.

Although eating and smoking appear to be very similar, in fact they are exact
opposites:

1. You eat to survive and to be healthy, whereas tobacco is the biggest cause
   of preventable death and disease in the history of Western civilization.

2. Food genuinely tastes good, and eating can be a genuinely pleasant
   experience, whereas smoking involves ingesting extremely toxic fumes and is
   known to cause depression, anxiety and panic disorders.

3. Eating doesn’t create hunger, it genuinely relieves it. Cigarettes don’t
   satisfy the ‘hunger’ to smoke, they create and perpetuate it.

to describe eating as a habit would be the same as describing breathing as a
habit.

eating itself is not a habit. Neither is smoking.

The only reason any smoker lights a cigarette is to try to end the slightly
empty, insecure hunger-like feeling that was created by the nicotine contained
in the previous cigarette.

smoking is not habit, IT IS DRUG ADDICTION!

we are not only buying them regularly but we have to have them.

We therefore need to smoke more to obtain the same effect. After quite a short
period the cigarette ceases to completely relieve the withdrawal pangs created
by the previous one, so that when you light a cigarette even though you do feel
better, you are in fact still slightly more stressed and slightly less relaxed
than you would be as a non-smoker, even when you are actually smoking the
cigarette.

the ‘habit’ doesn’t exist. The real reason every smoker keeps smoking is to
feed that ‘little monster’ he has created.

The monster tends to need feeding in certain situations and we come to
associate these occasions (or a combination of them) with smoking.

‘Big Four’ smoking occasions are:

`BOREDOM & CONCENTRATION` two complete opposites!

`STRESS & RELAXATION` two complete opposites!

How can a drug that relieved boredom by providing a distraction suddenly help
you concentrate when you need to remove distractions? It’s the same drug. It
can’t do both things because they are opposites.

world of science agrees—research shows smokers to have lower energy levels,
more problems concentrating and much higher levels of stress than non-smokers.

nicotine is also a powerful poison and tiny amounts are used in many commercial
insecticides.

tobacco contains hundreds of poisons, including benzene, polonium and cyanide.

cigarettes also contain toxic additives such as ammonia and formaldehyde.

All human beings are averse to the smell and taste of tobacco until they become
hooked.

When we smoked our first cigarette, for most of us inhaling resulted in a
coughing fit. If we managed to smoke the whole thing, we most likely
experienced dizziness or nausea.

The body’s way of telling us: ‘YOU ARE FEEDING ME POISON. STOP IT.’

The lucky ones are those who find that first cigarette so repulsive that they
cannot go through this process of learning to tolerate tobacco smoke;
physically their lungs cannot cope with it, and they avoid the trap.

the most tragic part of the whole business. How hard we have to work to become
hooked in the first place!

What we are actually doing when we learn to smoke is teaching our bodies to
become desensitized to the disgusting smell and taste in order to get our fix.

Smokers will even keep smoking through colds, ‘flu, sore throats, bronchitis
and emphysema.

1. Most of us carry on smoking because, although we know that the disadvantages
   of smoking outweigh the advantages, we believe that there is something
   intrinsically enjoyable or special that the cigarette gives us. We feel that
   after we stop smoking there will be a ‘void’, that our life will never be
   quite the same. This is an illusion, as I will demonstrate. The fact is that
   the cigarette gives you nothing.

2. Although it is a highly addictive drug because of the speed with which it
   hooks you, ironically, you are never badly hooked on the drug itself.
   Because it is so fast-acting it also leaves the body very quickly. Eight
   hours after putting out a cigarette, you are 97% nicotine-free. After just
   three days of not smoking, you are 100% nicotine-free.

Breaking the physical addiction and getting through the chemical withdrawal is
fast and easy to cope with.

Most smokers go all night without a cigarette. The withdrawal ‘pangs’ do not
even wake them up.

Smokers have the illusion that they only suffer from withdrawal when they try
to quit. In fact, smokers suffer withdrawal their entire smoking lives.

The human body is an incredible machine and irrespective of how many years you
have been smoking, the body bounces back quickly once you quit, provided you
haven’t already contracted an irreversible smoking-related condition. The
recovery starts immediately after you put out your final cigarette. Within just
twenty minutes your heart rate returns to normal and after 24 hours, the
likelihood of a heart attack is reduced by half.

Think of nicotine addiction as the ‘little monster’ I mentioned earlier. It’s
utterly insignificant and you can squash it like a bug. The only danger of the
little monster is that it feeds the big monster—the **BRAINWASHING**.

## CHAPTER 7 BRAINWASHING AND THE SLEEPING PARTNER

most of our behavior and attitudes are determined by our surroundings,
upbringing and by forces of which we are largely unaware.

What better way to show your cool and rebellious nature than to smoke?

it’s obvious to me that if you are in a business where 5 million of your
customers die every year, you need to replace them somehow.

for a time, Joe Camel was as well known as Mickey Mouse among American
pre-schoolers.

Every day nearly 1,500 Americans die of smoking-related causes.

In 2003, glue sniffing, heroin use and marijuana use caused around 3,000 deaths
in the US.

450,000 deaths caused by tobacco.

We need to begin to ask some searching questions: Why am I doing it? What does
the cigarette really do for me? Do I really need to smoke?

Why am I doing it?

What does the cigarette really do for me?

Do I really need to smoke?

NO, OF COURSE YOU DON’T.

With most smokers the triggers are the normal, mild stresses of life, like
answering the telephone or socializing.

The worst thing about smoking is not the damage to your health or bank account;
it’s the warping of your mind. You search for any excuse to go on smoking,
despite being acutely aware of the harm it is causing.

You didn’t get addicted to nicotine because you fell into the habit of smoking.
It’s the other way around. You had to get into the habit of smoking to service
your addiction.

The beautiful truth is that there is absolutely nothing to give up.

On the contrary, you will be freeing yourself from this terrible slavery and
achieving marvelous positive gains.

ESCAPING!

What tempts us to smoke in the first place is the influence of people already
smoking,

We assume that smokers are getting some tremendous pleasure from smoking and
fear that we are missing out on it.

It is incredible to me that we continue to allow tobacco companies to spend
billions of dollars persuading healthy teenagers to smoke and that the
government itself profits from smokers to the tune of billions of dollars every
year.

the smoker who is surrendering a lifetime of: 
- HEALTH 
- ENERGY 
- WEALTH 
- PEACE OF MIND 
- CONFIDENCE 
- COURAGE 
- SELF-RESPECT 
- HAPPINESS 
- FREEDOM

The only thing the cigarette does is remove the aggravation caused by the
previous cigarette, so that the smoker, for a moment, feels like a non-smoker.

## CHAPTER 8 RELIEVING WITHDRAWAL PANGS

Because stress or mild anxiety can feel like the empty, insecure feeling caused
by nicotine withdrawal, our subconscious gets tricked into believing that the
cigarette will relieve real stress too.

Of course we do feel better when we have a cigarette but all we have done is to
relieve the stress and discomfort caused by withdrawing from the previous
cigarette.

## CHAPTER 9 STRESS

the cigarette has only removed the portion of her stress that was caused by
withdrawing from the nicotine in the previous cigarette.

Try to imagine getting to the stage where your doctor tells you that unless you
stop smoking he is going to have to remove your legs. Just pause for a moment
and reflect on that. Try to visualize life without your legs. Try to imagine
the frame of mind of a man who, issued with that warning, actually continues to
smoke and then has his legs removed.

Cigarettes not only destroy your nerves but also contain many toxins that
attack the central nervous system and other key organs and systems,
progressively destroying your physical health.

Get it clear in your mind: Cigarettes don’t relieve stress; they create it.
Cigarettes don’t help you to calm down and relax; they cause you to be panicky
and agitated. One of the most wonderful things about breaking free from this
awful drug is the return of your courage, confidence and self-esteem.

Cigarettes don’t relieve stress; they create it. Cigarettes don’t help you to
calm down and relax; they cause you to be panicky and agitated. One of the most
wonderful things about breaking free from this awful drug is the return of your
courage, confidence and self-esteem.

## CHAPTER 10 BOREDOM

**Boredom is a frame of mind, not a medical condition**.

Initially, you were bored. Now you are bored and smoking.

If smoking relieved boredom, smokers would never be bored.

A cigarette provides a momentary distraction if we are bored, in much the same
way as any other activity would.

## CHAPTER 11 CONCENTRATION

When you need to concentrate, you automatically try to remove distractions.

But the smoker is already distracted: that ‘little monster’ wants his fix, and
until he gets is, the smoker will find it difficult to concentrate.

cigarettes do not help concentration, rather that experiencing withdrawal makes
it harder to concentrate.

Apart from the constant distraction of going through nicotine withdrawal, the
progressive blocking of arteries and veins with the poisons contained in
tobacco starves the brain of oxygen.

It’s blatantly obvious that cigarettes don’t enhance concentration or get our
creative juices flowing.

**The cigarette gets the credit for everything and the blame for nothing**. The
moment you stop smoking, everything that goes wrong in your life is blamed on
the fact that you’ve stopped smoking.

## CHAPTER 12 RELAXATION

Nicotine is a chemical stimulant (a poor and inefficient one, but a stimulant
nevertheless).

Don’t take my word for it: take your pulse rate then light a cigarette, take
three or four drags in quick succession and check your pulse rate again.

it is the little monster that needs to be fed, and until he is, the smoker
can’t relax.

Smokers are tense when they aren’t smoking.

Nicotine withdrawal creates feelings of slight tension and anxiety.

We smoke so that we can remove the feelings of withdrawal and feel like a
non-smoker.

**Smokers aren’t relaxed. They’ve forgotten what it feels like to be completely
relaxed**.

This is one of the many joys you have to look forward to—to once again know
what it feels like to be totally relaxed.

## CHAPTER 13 COMBINATION CIGARETTES

A combination cigarette is one where two or more of our primary triggers for
smoking, (i.e. boredom, concentration, relaxation and stress) are present at
the same time.

Social functions like parties or weddings are good examples of occasions that
can be both stressful and relaxing.

**WHAT AM I GIVING UP? ABSOLUTELY NOTHING**!

The thing that makes it difficult to quit is fear:
- being deprived of our pleasure or crutch;
-fear that pleasant situations will never be quite as pleasant without the cigarette;
- fear of being unable to cope with stressful situations.

**CIGARETTES DO NOT FILL A VOID. THEY CREATE ONE**!

When we smoke, our body sends us warning signs in the form of the cough,
dizziness, and nausea and we ignore these at our peril.

Cigarettes do not improve meals. They ruin them. They destroy your sense of
smell and taste.

As a smoker, all you can think about is why everyone else is eating so slowly
and when it will end, so that you can smoke. Like

Because many of us start smoking on social occasions when we are young and a
little shy, we acquire the belief that we cannot enjoy social occasions without
a cigarette.

Cigarettes systematically attack your nervous system, robbing you of your
confidence.

Greatest gains from stopping are psychological, and they include:
1. The return of your confidence and courage
2. Freedom from the slavery of drug addiction
3. Not having to go through life knowing you are being despised by half of the
   population and, worst of all, despising yourself

Not only is life better as a non-smoker, it is infinitely more enjoyable. I do
not only mean you will be healthier and wealthier. I mean you will be happier
and enjoy life far more.

**Lung cancer, arteriosclerosis, emphysema, bronchitis, angina, asthma, or
coronary heart disease**.

The sore is the fear that makes us shut our mind to these things, created by
that barely noticeable slightly empty, insecure feeling that says, ‘I want a
cigarette.’

Non-smokers don’t suffer from this fear and one of the sweetest things about
breaking free from the slavery of smoking is to no longer have your life
dominated by fear.

## CHAPTER 15 SELF–IMPOSED SLAVERY

Who could conceive of anything as stupid as giving away this priceless gift in
order to be enslaved to a drug that doesn’t even get you high?

Even during my own daughter’s wedding, I was thinking, ‘Let’s get on with it,
so I can get outside and have a smoke’.

To me one of the tremendous joys of being a non-smoker is to be free from that
slavery, to be able to enjoy the whole of my life, not spending half of it not
smoking and wishing I could and the other half smoking, wishing I didn’t have
to.

## CHAPTER 16 I’LL SAVE $X EVERY WEEK

A confirmed smoker is somebody who can afford it, doesn’t believe it injures
their health and isn’t worried about the social stigma

You are actually using that money to ruin your physical health, to destroy your
courage and confidence, and to suffer a lifetime of slavery, bad breath and
stained teeth.

Yet here we are spending tens, if not hundreds of thousands of dollars for the
privilege of poisoning ourselves to death.

We have to keep our head in the sand and believe the brainwashing, because
otherwise we feel stupid being a smoker.

**Smoking is a chain reaction**.
- Withdrawing from your first cigarette made you smoke the second.
- The first cigarette you ever smoked cost you everything you have ever spent
- Your next cigarette will cost you everything you will ever spend in the
  future on cigarettes.

Estimate how much you would spend on smoking for the rest of your life. The
amount will vary from individual to individual, but for the purposes of this
exercise let us assume it is $50,000.

That is, do not smoke that first cigarette. If you do, that one cigarette will
cost you $50,000.

Would you spend $50,000 to get re-addicted to a drug that doesn’t even get you
high?

## CHAPTER 17 HEALTH

Smokers think they are aware of the health risks. They are not.

**This is the one!** Fortunately you get a warning and this is it. If you smoke
another cigarette your head will explode,

Why smokers, recalling Uncle Fred who smoked forty a day until he was eighty,
will ignore the millions of smokers who are cut down in their prime because of
this poisonous weed.

The smoker goes to a lot of trouble not to step under a bus, and the odds are
hundreds of thousands to one against it happening. Yet the smoker risks the
near certainty of being crippled by smoking and seems oblivious to the risks.

Smoking is easily the biggest cause of preventable death in the world.

Every year around 5 million deaths are caused by smoking

A cough is one of nature’s fail-safe methods for expelling foreign matter and
poisons from the lungs. The cough itself is not a disease; it is a symptom.

When they don’t cough, the poison remains in their lungs, and this is when they
can cause cancer and the many other horrendous diseases associated with
smoking.

If you knew for certain that your next cigarette would be the one that
triggered off the cancer in your body,

Forget the disease itself (it’s difficult to imagine something so painful) but
imagine that you have to go to your local cancer hospital to suffer through the
endless rounds of chemo. Now you are not planning the rest of your life. You
are planning your death. What is going to happen to your family and loved ones?
How would it feel to have your hopes and dreams smashed to a pulp in a single
heartbeat? Your whole life snatched from you to be replaced by emptiness,
terror and an excruciatingly painful and humiliating death? How would you even
begin to explain it to your children?

All our lives as smokers we say, ‘I’ll quit tomorrow’. But tomorrow never
comes, does it?

You have a golden opportunity to save your life by breaking free from this
awful addiction and the limitless pain and suffering it brings

Every time you take a drag you are breathing cancer-triggering fumes deep into
your lungs, and lung cancer—horrific as it is—is by no means the worst of the
killer diseases that cigarettes cause or contribute to.

Think of a heroin addict deprived of his drug and going through withdrawal. He
is miserable, stressed, panicky and experiencing severe physical symptoms. Now
picture that same addict’s utter relief when he shoots up and is able to remove
those awful symptoms. Non-heroin addicts don’t suffer that panic feeling. The
heroin causes it. The

**Non-smokers don’t get anxious, panicky or stressed when they can’t smoke**.

The cigarette causes those symptoms and the next cigarette partially relieves
them.

The fear of contracting lung cancer scared me but didn’t make me quit because I
believed it was rather like walking through a minefield. You either got away
with it or you didn’t. It didn’t even occur to me that I didn’t have to walk
through the minefield in the first place.

Realize just how more enjoyable your life will be when you have escaped.

Progressive clogging up of our arteries and veins and the gradual deterioration
of every muscle and organ caused by depriving them of oxygen and other
nutrients.

Even worse is that we replace these nutrients with poison and deadly compounds
such as carbon monoxide.

While I strongly support the right of everyone to have their own opinion, they
are not entitled to their own facts.

How can our immune system function effectively when we are starving our body of
the oxygen and nutrients it needs to thrive and survive?

How can it work properly for you when it is under constant attack from the
poisons contained in tobacco smoke? It’s bad enough that smoking causes so many
life-threatening conditions, but what is worse is that it on top of this, it
also works, like AIDS, to brutalize our immune system making us less able to
fight off other diseases, infections and conditions.

Improved complexion is one of the first things that people will notice about
you when you quit, and it usually happens within a week or so).

Occasionally get violent pains in my chest, which I feared must be lung cancer
but now assume to have been angina.

Smoking thickens the consistency of your blood and that the brownish color was
due to the lack of oxygen.

When you feel fit and healthy, you’ll enjoy sex much more and more often.

The ‘habit’ is a lifetime’s chain of fear, disease, misery and slavery, each
cigarette creating the need for the next.

When you start smoking you light a fuse. The trouble is, YOU DON’T KNOW HOW
LONG THE FUSE IS. Every time you light a cigarette you are one step nearer to
the bomb exploding. HOW WILL YOU KNOW IF IT’S THE NEXT ONE?

## CHAPTER 18 ENERGY

My attacks of bronchitis and asthma stopped overnight, never to return.

Today, at age seventy-two I jog two to three miles a day, work out for thirty
minutes in the gym and swim twenty lengths. It’s great to have energy, and when
you feel mentally and physically strong, it feels great to be alive.

Begin to let yourself get excited about this wonderful thing you are doing for
yourself. USE YOUR IMAGINATION!

## CHAPTER 19 IT RELAXES ME AND GIVES ME CONFIDENCE

We fall for a con trick: we acknowledge the slight boost that the cigarette
gives us by partially removing the slight feeling of emptiness and insecurity
when we light up, but we conveniently forget that it was withdrawing from the
previous cigarette that created those symptoms in the first place.

**Smoking for relaxation is like drinking bourbon to get sober**.

Because I got panicky when I couldn’t smoke, I assumed that the cigarette gave
me courage and confidence.

It never occurred to me that non-smokers don’t have that panic feeling and they
therefore don’t need the artificial boost (of removing the symptoms of
withdrawal created by the previous cigarette) the cigarette gives.

Of course, bad things happen in my life—this is the human condition—and I am
subject to the normal stress and strains, but it is wonderful to have the
confidence and courage to deal with them. And the improved health, energy and
freedom make the good times more enjoyable too.

## CHAPTER 20 THOSE SINISTER BLACK SHADOWS

Another of the great joys of breaking free from the slavery of smoking is to be
free from those sinister black shadows that lurk at the back of every smoker’s
mind.

All smokers sense they have been trapped, and to make a bad situation
tolerable, we have to close our minds to the ill-effects of smoking.

those black shadows are always lurking in our sub-conscious minds, never very
far beneath the surface. 

There are many substantial advantages to becoming a
happy non-smoker. 

Some of them are pretty obvious—vastly improved health, a much-improved
financial status and ending to the slavery of smoking.

## CHAPTER 21 THE ADVANTAGES OF BEING A SMOKER

## CHAPTER 22 THE WILLPOWER METHOD OF STOPPING

It is an accepted ‘fact’ in our society that it is very difficult to stop
smoking.

The truth is that if you go about it the right way (i.e. follow the
instructions in this book) it is ridiculously easy.

As a smoker about to attempt to quit, you might feel that you’re about to
attempt the impossible, but really all you need do is not light your next
cigarette.

No one forces you to smoke.

Not necessary for survival.

We conveniently ignore the many contradictions that surround smoking. Like the
fact that we use a cigarette as a stimulant in the morning to help us get
going, and as a relaxant in the evening to help us ‘take the edge off’.

It also doesn’t occur to us that non-smokers seem to get on perfectly well
without them.

Whether we openly admit it or not, soon we are smoking because we don’t think
we can stop.

Because we get miserable when we can’t smoke, we assume it gives us great
pleasure when we do.

We tell ourselves that it ‘wasn’t the right time’ to quit. So we decide to wait
until there is less stress or no stress in our lives before trying again. Of
course, this gives us the perfect excuse to keep smoking indefinitely because
so long as you are smoking, you will have stress.

Willpower is useless because it doesn’t help the smoker to resolve the smoking
dilemma and remove the desire to smoke.

Quite simply, the key to being a happy non-smoker is to remove the desire to
smoke. With no desire to smoke, it takes no Willpower not to do so.

The ex-smoker tells themselves that they’ll ‘just have one’ to prove that
they’ve kicked it or ‘to see what it’s like’. Of course, they get hooked even
faster this time around

It isn’t a lack of willpower that is the problem, but a conflict of wills.

This conflict that is at the root of the smoker’s dilemma: every smoker wants
to quit, but every smoker wants to keep smoking.

The smoker fails to quit not because he doesn’t have enough willpower but
because he has failed to resolve the conflict of wills.

60,000,000 Americans who have already successfully quit.

The smoker is waiting for things to improve, but so long as he feels he is
being deprived, he will remain miserable.

There is no such thing as ‘just one’ cigarette.

As soon as he puts that cigarette out, the nicotine begins to leave the body
and the old empty, insecure feeling (i.e. the physical symptoms of nicotine
withdrawal) reappears.

True success in the smoking cessation context is when you are happy to be a
non-smoker,

12-month success rates using pure Willpower with no education, motivation or
support range from 2–5%.

Around 7% for Nicotine Replacement Therapy

12–15% for Zyban

15% for the latest ‘wonder drug’ Champix.

If every time we lit up we had to be acutely aware of the smell, the taste, the
consequences and that this might be the one that triggers the lung cancer, then
even the illusion of enjoyment would disappear.

We smoke to feed that ‘little nicotine monster’.

Once you have purged him from your body and the brainwashing from your mind,
you’ll have neither the need nor the desire to smoke.

## CHAPTER 23 BEWARE OF CUTTING DOWN

Only people who have never smoked a cigarette in their life endorse this
strategy.

Terrible things happen.

You keep the ‘little monster’ alive

This forces you to experience the ‘big monster’—the

waiting for the next cigarette.

You have the worst of all worlds.

willpower as if you were quitting,

you don’t even get to be a non-smoker!

The main difficulty of stopping smoking is not the chemical aspect of the
addiction. That’s easy.

The ‘cravings’ that terrify us so profoundly are, in fact, so mild they don’t
even wake you up.

Most smokers go between eight and ten hours every night without a cigarette and
it doesn’t bother them. Interestingly, many of them couldn’t do this during the
day.

The real problem is psychological.

The real challenge that smokers face is to counter the brainwashing to which we
all have been exposed.

A major part of the brainwashing is the idea of the cigarette as a reward or
special treat or crutch.

Cutting down reinforces this illusion.

It’s not that we enjoy smoking, it’s that we’re miserable when we can’t smoke.

But non-smokers don’t get miserable when they can’t smoke.

The cigarette causes the misery.

You can’t become less addicted to something, you’re either addicted or you are
not.

You aren’t deciding how much you will smoke; the rate at which your body
metabolizes nicotine dictates how much you will smoke.

So your choices are simple: Cut down for life. This is self-imposed torture and
you will fail miserably (as have millions of smokers before you) because
smoking isn’t a habit that you can break and re-make in another form, but drug
addiction. “Cutting down” doesn’t work with drug addiction! Continue to smoke
as you do now, being dominated by fear, misery and slavery. What is the point?
Break free, take your life back and give yourself the gifts of health,
happiness and freedom.

## CHAPTER 24 JUST ONE CIGARETTE

It is ‘just one cigarette’ that gets us hooked in the first place. That ‘one’
cigarette led to the tens of thousands of others you have smoked.

It is ‘just one cigarette’ to tide us over a difficult patch or on a special
occasion that is the cause of failure of most of our attempts to stop.

There is no such thing as ‘just one cigarette’.

Whenever you think about smoking you must see it as a lifetime’s chain of
filth, disease, fear, misery and slavery. These are the facts of smoking.

A lifetime of paying an exorbitant amount of money for the privilege of feeding
yourself poison. A lifetime of shame, anger, guilt, bad breath, and mental and
physical torture. And for what do we put ourselves through this awful
experience? So we can remove the slightly empty feeling of withdrawal caused by
the previous cigarette, and feel like a non-smoker.

You never get a day off, or even a couple of hours off. It doesn’t matter if
it’s twenty below outside, or if you have a cough or a cold, or if you’re on a
plane or at the movies—it never lets up and gives you a break.

It’s only when we are not smoking that the cigarette seems desirable.

If you could go back in time to when you smoked your first cigarette and you
had the knowledge, understanding and experience of smoking you have now, would
you still light that cigarette?

Stop selling yourself short. **You can do this. Anybody can. It’s ridiculously
easy**.

There is nothing to give up. On the contrary, by quitting you are earning
yourself the wonderful gifts of health, happiness and freedom. There is no such
thing as ‘just one cigarette’, just a lifetime’s chain of filth, disease and
misery. Your very first cigarette led to every single cigarette you have ever
smoked. In a smoking context, there is nothing unique or different about you.
All smokers fell into the same trap, and with the right information and
mindset, all smokers can find it easy to stop.

There is nothing to give up. On the contrary, by quitting you are earning
yourself the wonderful gifts of health, happiness and freedom.

There is no such thing as ‘just one cigarette’, just a lifetime’s chain of
filth, disease and misery. Your very first cigarette led to every single
cigarette you have ever smoked.

In a smoking context, there is nothing unique or different about you. All
smokers fell into the same trap, and with the right information and mindset,
all smokers can find it easy to stop.

If we can replace the fear with facts, we can see the cigarette for what it
really is—a nicotine delivery device—and remove the belief that we ‘need’ to
smoke.

## CHAPTER 25 CASUAL SMOKERS, TEENAGERS, NON–SMOKERS

The casual smoker is trying to convince both of you that he doesn’t have a
problem. But if he didn’t have a problem, surely he wouldn’t have a need to
mention it? After all, I’m sure you don’t go around telling people that you can
go all week without shooting up with heroin. Why make such a statement unless
you are a heroin addict? Only a heroin addict would be proud of going all week
without.

Picture that little nicotine monster as an itch.

For the most part, it is so slight we are barely even aware of it.

The natural tendency is to scratch it as soon as you become aware of it. By
lighting up, we scratch the itch,

Soon, nicotine withdrawal creates a permanent itch,

We continue to allow tobacco companies and their proxies to promote tobacco to
children. According to the Smoke Free Movies website, between May 2002 and
April 2003, 82% of top grossing PG-13 films featured smoking scenes and half of
all the smoking shots were in movies rated for kids.

## CHAPTER 26 THE SECRET SMOKER

## CHAPTER 27 A SOCIAL HABIT?

These bodies of ours are the most sophisticated machines on the planet and they
tell us—no, they practically yell at us—from the first drag to the last that
cigarettes are POISON.

The only reason we get dragged into it in the first place is because of the
social pressure from our friends or siblings.

What was once a social habit has become a source of shame and embarrassment.
And it’s not getting better.

Every day more and more smokers leave this sinking ship. In a 2008 Gallup poll
over three-quarters of current smokers want to quit. As smokers give up in
droves, those left in the trap begin to worry about being left on their own.
DON’T LET IT BE YOU!

## CHAPTER 28 TIMING

Now is the right time to stop,

Smoking kills around 5 million people every year, including an estimated 450,000 Americans.

It is, by far, the leading cause of preventable death in every developed
country in the world.

First of all, identify the times when smoking appears most important to you. If
you are a businessman and smoke for the illusion of stress relief, choose a
relatively slack period, or perhaps your annual vacation. If you think you
smoke mainly when you are bored, choose a time when you know you’ll be busy.

Look a few weeks into the future and try to anticipate whether there might be
an occasion or event that might cause you to fail.

WHATEVER YOU DO, DON’T FALL INTO THE TRAP OF PROCRASTINATING AND PUTTING IT OUT
OF YOUR MIND. FINALIZE YOUR TIMETABLE NOW AND LOOK FORWARD TO IT.

Remember you aren’t giving anything up. On the contrary: you are about to
receive marvelous positive gains.

When you smoked that very first cigarette, did you really decide then that you
would continue to smoke for the rest of your life? OF COURSE YOU DIDN’T! Do you
want to be a smoker for the rest of your life? OF COURSE NOT!

So when will you stop? Tomorrow? Isn’t that what you said yesterday? Next year?
Isn’t that what you said last year?

We believe that we live stressful lives. In fact, we don’t. We’ve taken most of
the genuine stress out of our lives. We have a comfortable roof over our heads.
When we leave our home we aren’t likely to be attacked by man-eating predators.
Most of us don’t have to worry about where our next meal is coming from. We
have heat, light and clean water.

The most stressful periods in our lives tend to be childhood and early
adolescence. The reason for this is that everything is new and everything is
changing. But during this most stressful period of our lives, we didn’t need to
smoke. We were perfectly able to cope because 3.8 billion years of evolution
has equipped us to do so.

We confuse responsibility with stress. Responsibility becomes stressful only if you are not strong enough to handle it.

What destroys them is not the stresses of life, or the pressure of being in the
public eye, but the socalled crutches they turn to in order to try to handle
that stress.

Just think how wonderful it will be not to have your life dominated by a
four-inch tube of paper with poison in it. Just think how wonderful it will be
to replace a life of fear, anxiety, stress and slavery with one of health,
happiness and freedom! Why wouldn’t it be easy—and fun?

## CHAPTER 29 WILL I MISS THE CIGARETTE?

No! Once that little nicotine ‘monster’ is dead and the chemical addiction is
broken, any remaining brainwashing will vanish and you will find that you will
be both physically and mentally better equipped not only to cope with the
stresses and strains of life but to enjoy the good times to the fullest.

There is only one danger and that is the influence of people who are still
smoking.

Remember: ‘just one cigarette’ doesn’t exist. Stop seeing the cigarette as a
single object and see it how it really is: just one more link in the endless
chain of smoking.

Don’t envy smokers; pity them.

Notice how agitated and irritable they get when they can’t smoke.

Remember: they aren’t enjoying any of them; they are merely feeding their
addiction.

That’s what smoking is: a life sentence where life means a life of filth,
disease, fear, misery and slavery.

Poor smokers will have to continue to pay a fortune for the privilege of
poisoning and suffocating themselves to death.

Smokers are deprived of their: HEALTH ENERGY MONEY SELF-CONFIDENCE PEACE OF
MIND COURAGE SELF-ESTEEM SELF-RESPECT TRANQUILLITY FREEDOM

Get out of the habit of envying smokers and start seeing them for the sad,
enslaved creatures they really are.

You wouldn’t envy a heroin addict. Opiate use kills around 3,000 Americans a
year. Nicotine kills over 450,000 Americans and an estimated 5 million
worldwide.

It has already killed far more people on this planet than all the wars in
history combined.

If you don’t enjoy being a smoker today, you’ll enjoy it even less tomorrow.

## CHAPTER 30 WILL I PUT ON WEIGHT?

The withdrawal pangs from nicotine are very similar to hunger pangs, so the two
are easily confused and some people might eat when they aren’t really hungry.

When that ‘little monster’ leaves your body the feeling of insecurity leaves
with it. Your confidence returns, together with a marvelous feeling of
achievement and self-respect.

When that ‘little monster’ leaves your body the feeling of insecurity leaves
with it. Your confidence returns, together with a marvelous feeling of
achievement and self-respect.

You feel in control of your life, and you can use that control to determine not
only your eating habits, but in a wide variety of wonderful ways.

Stopping smoking does not lead to weight gain; overeating does. Food and any
other substitutes make it harder to quit smoking, not easier,

## CHAPTER 31 AVOID FALSE INCENTIVES

Many smokers, while trying to stop by using Willpower, try to increase their
levels of motivation by providing themselves with false incentives.

A typical one is ‘My family and I can have a great vacation on the money I will
save.’

this approach can even heighten the sense of deprivation because the smoker now
perceives that he has to abstain for fifty weeks to go on a vacation that he
feels that he’ll never be able to enjoy without a cigarette anyway.

Instead, you should focus on the other side of the equation: What am I getting
out of the cigarette? Why do I need to smoke?

Another typical example is the office or family bet or pact.

They almost always end in failure. Why?

1. The incentive is false. Why should we want to stop just because other people
   are doing so? All this does is to create additional pressure, which
   increases the sense of deprivation and sacrifice.

2. The ‘Rotten Apple’ theory, or inter-dependence.

Using this method one or more participants are guaranteed to fail, and this
failure will come sooner rather than later. This gives the other participants
the excuse they have been waiting for.

3. ‘Sharing the credit’ is the flip side of the ‘Rotten Apple’ theory. It’s
   true that the loss of face is not so bad when shared around, but who wants
   to fail in the first place? The problem is that if, against all the odds you
   are using willpower and you do succeed, you have to share the credit with
   the other members of the group.

What is smoking doing for me? ABSOLUTELY NOTHING. Why do I need to do it? YOU
DON’T! YOU ARE ONLY PUNISHING YOURSELF.

## CHAPTER 32 THE EASY WAY TO STOP SMOKING

It is ridiculously easy to stop smoking. All you have to do is two things.

All you have to do is two things. 
1. Make the decision that you are never going to smoke again. 
2. Don’t mope about it. Rejoice.

The main problem in quitting is not the chemical withdrawal, which is barely
even noticeable, but the brainwashing

When I finally broke free I went from a hundred cigarettes a day to zero
without a single bad moment or pang of regret. I even **enjoyed the withdrawal
period because I saw it for what it really was—a barely noticeable feeling in
the pit of my stomach, which was a signal that the ‘little monster’ was
dying**.  The truth of the matter is that stopping smoking is the most
wonderful thing that has happened in my life.

During my previous attempts, no matter how determined I was, I was basically
trying to stop smoking, hoping that if I could survive long enough without a
cigarette, the urge would eventually go.

Up to then, whenever I failed, I had consoled myself with the thought that it
would be easier next time. It never occurred to me that I might have to go on
smoking for the rest of my life. This thought filled me with horror and started
me thinking very deeply about the subject.

Instead of lighting up subconsciously, I became more aware of my smoking and
began to analyze my thoughts and feelings as I was doing it. This confirmed
what I already knew. I wasn’t enjoying any of them, and they were truly filthy
and disgusting.

They appeared stronger and far more relaxed than smokers.

Seemed to be able to handle stress perfectly well without smoking,

Having far more fun than smokers.

Energy and a zest for life that I envied.

**‘You get the odd pang, but it really isn’t worth bothering about.’**

“Miss it? You must be joking. I’ve never felt better in my life.”

I now knew that I didn’t enjoy smoking. In fact I hated the whole filthy
business, and I did not want to spend the rest of my life being the slave of
this disgusting weed.

I said to myself: “Allen, whether you like it or not, YOU HAVE SMOKED YOUR LAST
CIGARETTE.”

The beautiful truth is that IT IS EASY TO STOP SMOKING. It is only the
indecision and moping about it that makes it difficult.

Even when they are addicted to nicotine, smokers can go for relatively long
periods without smoking and it doesn’t bother them.

It is only when you want a cigarette but can’t have one that the sense of
deprivation comes.

Therefore the key to making it easy is to make your decision certain and final.
Not to hope you have kicked it, but to know you have. Never doubt or question
your decision. In fact, **celebrate it**.

There are a couple of essential points and it is necessary to get them clear in
your mind before you start.

1. **Realize that you can do this. There is nothing different about you that
   makes quitting uniquely challenging.** Millions of Americans have done it,
   and you can too. The only person who can make you smoke that next cigarette
   is you.
2. **There is absolutely nothing to give up. On the contrary, there are enormous
   positive gains to be made.** I do not only mean you will be healthier and
   wealthier. I mean that you will be able to enjoy the good times more and
   that your ability to cope during the bad times will improve.
3. **Get it clear in your mind that there is no such thing as one cigarette.**
   Smoking is drug addiction and a chain reaction. The first cigarette you ever
   smoked is responsible for every one you have ever smoked.
4. **See smoking for what it really is. It is not a sociable habit with some
   unfortunate side effects. It is drug addiction and a disease.** Face up to
   the fact that, whether you like it or not, YOU HAVE GOT THIS DISEASE. It
   won’t go away just because you bury your head in the sand.  Remember: like
   all progressive diseases, it gets worse and worse. The easiest and best time
   to rid yourself of this disease is now.
5. **Separate the disease (i.e. the chemical addiction) from the frame of mind of
   being a smoker or a non-smoker.** All smokers, if given the opportunity to
   go back to the time before they became hooked, would jump at that
   opportunity and choose a non-smoking life. You have that opportunity today!
   Embrace it! Don’t even think about it as ‘giving up’ smoking. As soon as you
   make the decision to smoke your final cigarette you become a non-smoker. You
   should celebrate right from the outset, and you should continue to celebrate
   for the rest of your life.

If you have a feeling of doom and gloom, it will be for one of the following
reasons.
1. Something has not quite ‘clicked’ in your mind. Re-read the above five
   points and ask yourself if you genuinely believe them to be true. If you
   doubt any point, re-read the appropriate chapter or chapters.
2. You fear failure itself. Do not worry. Just read on. You will succeed. The
   whole business of smoking is like a confidence trick on a grand scale.
   Intelligent people do fall for confidence tricks, but only once. Having seen
   through the smoking illusions, you will not fall for the same con trick
   again so you should have no fear of failure.
3. You agree with everything, but you are still miserable. Don’t be! Open your
   eyes. Something wonderful is happening. You are about to escape from the
   prison. Anyway, it is the cigarette that is causing the misery—non-smokers
   aren’t miserable when they can’t smoke!

It is essential to start with the correct frame of mind: “Isn’t it great that I am a non-smoker!”

Two important warnings:
1. Delay your plan to smoke your last cigarette until you have finished the
   book.
2. I have mentioned several times a withdrawal period of three days (after
   which you are 100% nicotine-free). This can cause misunderstanding.

First, you may subconsciously feel that you have to suffer for three days.
Provided you have the right mindset, which means seeing quitting not as losing
a friend, but as killing an enemy, you don’t.

Secondly, avoid the trap of thinking, ‘Somehow I have just got to abstain for
three days and then I will be free.’ Nothing will actually happen after three
days. You won’t suddenly feel like a non-smoker. Non-smokers do not feel any
different from smokers. If you are moping about stopping during the three days,
in all probability you will still be moping about it after three weeks, three
months or even three years.

What I am saying is, if you can start right now by saying, ‘I am never going to
smoke again. Isn’t it wonderful?’ all temptation will go.

Whereas if you say, ‘If only I can survive three days without a cigarette,’ you
will be dying for a cigarette after the three days are up.

## CHAPTER 33 THE WITHDRAWAL PERIOD

Although you are 100% nicotine-free after three days of abstinence it can take
up to three weeks before our mind and body become fully accustomed to the
absence of nicotine and many of the other thousands of chemicals present in
tobacco smoke.

It is not uncommon to experience smoking thoughts during this period. These
consist of two quite separate factors.

1. The physical withdrawal pangs of nicotine—that slightly empty, insecure
   feeling, like hunger, which smokers identify as a ‘need’ to smoke.
2. The psychological trigger of certain events such as a telephone conversation
   or a coffee break.

Understand and differentiate between these two factors

If smokers using willpower to quit can manage to abstain for a few days, the
physical component of the ‘pang’ disappears. It is the psychological triggers
that cause the difficulty.

During the early days of being quit, certain events may trigger the thought, ‘I
want a cigarette.’

In such situations, ‘I want a cigarette’ becomes a conditioned reflex. It is
essential to counter-condition your response in these situations otherwise you
will interpret your conditioned

‘I want a cigarette’ response as fact and then feel deprived because you can’t
have one. This is the beginning of the slippery slope of having to use
willpower.

**Get it clear in your mind: you don’t need to smoke and you don’t need to
torture yourself by regarding the cigarette as some sort of crutch or friend
when you know for a fact that it is neither**.

**There is no need to be miserable**.

Abandon the ridiculous concept of smoking as being pleasurable for its own
sake. If we smoked just for the sake of smoking, we could smoke herbal
cigarettes (no, not that kind of herb!).

The reason that herbal cigarettes haven’t taken off here or anywhere else is
that there is no point in smoking them because they haven’t got any nicotine.
We can clarify this point by comparing it with heroin. Do you think a heroin
addict shoots up because he enjoys using a hypodermic or to get the drug? It’s
so obvious with other people’s addictions, isn’t it? Smokers smoke to get
nicotine, not because they enjoy the act of smoking. 

As a vivid demonstration of this, look at the story of Next. Next was launched
by the world’s biggest tobacco company, Philip Morris, in 1989. It was touted
as a nicotine-free cigarette and the nicotine was removed by using
high-pressure carbon dioxide in a process similar to the method used by coffee

After experimenting with them, it began to dawn on smokers that there is no
point in smoking apart from to get the nicotine, and that there was no pleasure
in the physical act of smoking for its own sake.

Instead of feeling fearful and anxious about pangs, embrace them. Say to
yourself: ‘I know what this is—it’s the ‘little monster’ dying.

Don’t focus on the pang, but on what it represents—the death not of a friend,
but of a terrible enemy. One that enslaved you for years and stole your health,
your money, your self-respect, your courage and confidence, all the time trying
to kill you.

One that enslaved you for years and stole your health, your money, your
self-respect, your courage and confidence, all the time trying to kill you.

Think of the next few days and weeks as a game of poker where you have a Royal
Flush and your opponent doesn’t even have a pair of twos.

Whatever you do, don’t try not to think about smoking.

You will think about smoking—but it’s what you are thinking that it important.
Whenever you think about smoking, think how wonderful it is that you have
broken free.

Whenever you think about smoking, think how wonderful it is that you have
broken free. 
    
    SAVOR EACH THOUGHT AND EACH MOMENT. 

    REMIND YOURSELF HOW WONDERFUL IT IS TO BE FREE ONCE AGAIN 
    AND CELEBRATE THE PURE JOY OF NO LONGER BEING A PRISONER, 
    A SLAVE AND AN ADDICT.

If one of your smoking friends offers you a cigarette, you can be proud to say,
“No, thanks” safe in the knowledge that he will be envying not only the fact
that you are a non-smoker, but such an obviously happy one.

Traded in a life of fear, misery and slavery for one of health, happiness and
freedom.

Use rational thought to drown out fear and confusion.

Once you start telling yourself that you don’t need to smoke, and letting
yourself be happy about not having to smoke, it’s amazing how quickly this
replaces the conditioned response of the brainwashed smoker.

The reason that this ‘takes’ so easily is because it is the truth. You do not
need to smoke.

## CHAPTER 34 JUST ONE DRAG

CIGARETTES WERE NEVER ENJOYABLE.

Enjoyment wasn’t the reason you smoked; if it was, nobody would ever smoke more
than one cigarette.

The only reason you smoked was to feed that ‘little monster’ again. You were a
drug addict.

you had starved him for three or four days and he was, to all intents and
purposes, dead. Then you threw him a lifeline.

Now he alive again, craving nicotine.

That single drag has two damaging effects.
1. It keeps the ‘little monster’ alive in your body, craving nicotine.
2. It keeps the big monster—the brainwashing—alive in your mind, wanting a
   cigarette. If you take a drag, what’s to stop you taking another one? Or one
   hundred, or one million?

If you have one drag, you will be smoking for the rest of your life.

## CHAPTER 35 WILL IT BE HARDER FOR ME?

Believe it or not, it is not compulsory to mope around craving cigarettes when
these triggers come. Instead, why not use that opportunity to celebrate your
freedom and congratulate yourself that you have got rid of this evil monster?

## CHAPTER 36 THE MAIN REASONS FOR FAILURE

Two main reasons for failure

The first is the influence of other smokers.

Remember that the smoker envies you, and feel sorry for him.

The other main reason for failure is having a bad day.

Everyone has good and bad days, whether they smoke or not.

The Easyway Method quitter celebrates the fact that, even though today isn’t
good, he doesn’t have the additional stress and misery of being a smoker on top
of it.

When you are a smoker you have to block your mind to the many, many downsides
of smoking.

A positive mental approach is essential—always.

## CHAPTER 37 SUBSTITUTES

Substitutes include gum, candy, pills, patches and chocolate. DO NOT USE ANY OF
THEM.

They make it harder to quit, not easier because they perpetuate the myth that
you have given something up and that you need to replace it with something
else.

1. Smoking is a disease. You do not need a substitute disease when you quit.
2. You do not need nicotine. It is poison. You don’t need a substitute for
   poison.
3. Remember: cigarettes create the void; they do not fill it. Non-smokers don’t
   have a ‘void’. The quicker you truly accept that you do not need to smoke,
   or do anything else in its place, the sooner you will be truly free.

Within a couple of hours their nicotine levels have dropped to less than half.

After eight hours just under 3% of the nicotine from that cigarette remains

By the morning, in purely physical terms, we are virtually nicotine-free.

After just three days, we are nicotine free.

Every pang, however minor, is a symptom of recovery and you will be fully
recovered before you know it.

Enjoy ridding your body of this poison, and your mind of the slavery and
dependence.

1. **A nicotine pang can feel like a mild hunger pang**. So if you find
   yourself getting ‘hungry’ at odd times of the day, it’s more likely to be a
   nicotine pang. Just brush it off and celebrate yet another sign of your
   recovery.
2. **Nicotine speeds up the metabolism slightly but its effect on your weight
   when you stop smoking is minimal**. Nicotine also robs you of energy and
   once you stop smoking increased energy levels cause many people to actually
   lose weight on this method because instead of moping around eating chocolate
   and feeling deprived, you feel like getting out and doing things with all of
   your new-found energy and confidence.

a senior tobacco executive said in 1982, `We should start to see ourselves as a
drug company rather than a tobacco company.`

## CHAPTER 38 SHOULD I AVOID TEMPTATION?

Every smoker fears that when they stop smoking they also have to stop living.

I am delighted to tell you that the opposite is true—with the cigarette out of
your life, you can really start living.

This fear is really just a fear of the unknown and it is this that keeps us
smoking year after year.

1. How can I survive without a cigarette?

This fear is purely psychological and thoroughly irrational. Think about it
rationally. Why should we have a fear of not poisoning ourselves to death?

The question should not be ‘How can I survive without the cigarette?’ but `How
did I survive being a smoker all these years?`

life without cigarettes is dramatically better than life as a smoker and that
you will feel the benefits for the rest of your life.

As for social occasions, my view is that you have achieved something wonderful
and that you should celebrate from square one, not sit at home moping.

Why wouldn’t you be happy to get rid of such an evil monster? ‘Get out and
enjoy yourself!’ is my advice. There is so much to be happy about and the
sooner you get out and have fun, the sooner you receive affirmation of the
wonderful decision you have made to break free.

## CHAPTER 39 THE MOMENT OF REVELATION

Usually takes place about three weeks after a smoker stops.

the last of the poison is swept away, the last of the brainwashing disappears
along with it. Instead of telling yourself you do not need to smoke, you
suddenly realize that the last thread is broken and you can enjoy the rest of
your life without ever needing to smoke again. It is also usually from this
point that you start looking at smokers as worthy of pity. Smokers using
Willpower

Nowadays at the seminar I tell smokers that the physical withdrawal period is
around three days and that after three weeks you are truly free, but I dislike
giving these kinds of guidelines.

Firstly it creates an expectation that the smoker will have to suffer for three
days or three weeks. As I have already stated, this is not so; with the right
frame of mind the whole process is enjoyable right from the beginning.

The second is that it creates an expectation that at the end of the third week
something earth shattering will happen.

After three days the nicotine has left your body (as I have stated, most of it
actually leaves in the first couple of hours) and you are technically no longer
an addict.

Three weeks is usually around the time when people feel that they have really
broken free. This is also usually the time when most serious attempts to quit
with willpower fail.

They smoke a cigarette to show themselves that they’re in control and of
course, get immediately re-addicted.

The instant you extinguish your final cigarette, it’s over. You’ve won. No
force on earth can prevent you from claiming the life that you have earned and
the life you deserve. Go out, be proud, savor this moment and embrace your
future free from the slavery of drug addiction.

## CHAPTER 40 THE FINAL CIGARETTE

Check on the two essentials:
1. Do you feel certain of success?
2. Do you have a feeling of doom and gloom or a sense of excitement and
   anticipation that you are about to achieve something really wonderful?

Remember, you never decided to fall into the smoking trap. But that trap is
designed to enslave you for life. In order to escape you need to make the
positive decision that this will be your final cigarette and that you will
never again force yourself to do something that makes you feel so awful.

make that positive decision now. Make a solemn vow to yourself that when you
extinguish that final cigarette, come what may, you will never smoke another.

The beautiful truth is that it is not only ridiculously easy to quit but also
extremely enjoyable

The wonderful gifts you are about to receive as a non-smoker? Health, life,
happiness, freedom...

1. **Make the solemn vow now and mean it.**
2. **Smoke that final cigarette consciously, inhale the filth deeply into your
   lungs and ask yourself where the pleasure is.**
3. **When you put it out, do so not with a feeling of: ‘I must never smoke
   another’, or ‘I’m not allowed to smoke another’, but with the feeling:
   ‘Isn’t it great! I’m free! I’m no longer the slave of nicotine! I don’t ever
   have to put these filthy things in my mouth again.**
4. **Be aware that for the next few days, the ‘little monster’ will be inside
   you looking to be fed.** A slight physical craving for nicotine... When the
   feeling comes, respond with "**YIPPEE, I'M A NON-SMOKER!**" The body cannot
   crave nicotine. **Only the brain can crave**.  So when that slight feeling
   comes, respond by saying to yourself, “YIPPEE, I’M A NON-SMOKER!” and focus
   on all of the wonderful gifts you are giving yourself. Brush that feeling
   off as if it were a bit of fluff that had somehow landed on your sleeve.
5. **Willpower quitters do not recondition their ‘I want a cigarette’ response
   and therefore continue to crave cigarettes.** Because they want to smoke but
   can’t, the feeling of sacrifice and deprivation grows. This requires the use
   of willpower, which in turn leads to the feelings of panic, anxiety and
   stress that so many smokers who use the Willpower Method experience. No
   wonder they feel so miserable. They spend the rest of their lives
   desperately moping 
6. **It is the doubt and the waiting for nothing to happen that makes it
   difficult to quit. So never doubt your decision, you know it’s the correct
   one.** We could go through the pros and cons of smoking and a thousand times
   out of a thousand we would choose to be a non-smoker. Having made what you
   know to be the right decision, don’t doubt it. If you do, you will put
   yourself in a no-win situation. 

The real difference is that non-smokers have no desire to smoke. With no desire
to smoke, it takes no willpower not to do so. With no desire to smoke, there
are no cravings. Why would you crave something you don’t want? This is
completely within your power to achieve. 

You can break free, take control of your life back and build a future based on
health, happiness and freedom from the slavery of smoking. The choice couldn’t
be easier. This isn’t difficult. This is the easiest, and best, decision you’ll
ever make

YOU ARE ALREADY A HAPPY NON-SMOKER! 
1. You never doubt your decision
2. You don’t wait to become a non-smoker. **You’ve already won!**
3. You don’t try not to think about smoking. Think about it as much as you want
   and every time, celebrate that you have broken free. **YIPPEE! I'm a
   non-smoker!**
4. You don’t use substitutes
5. You see all other smokers for the drug addicts they are. Don’t envy drug
   addicts. The truth is they envy you.
6. Whether they are good days or bad, you don’t change your life just because
   you’ve recovered from the disease called nicotine addiction. Having
   recovered, you can now really start living! As the days go by and your
   health, both physical and mental improves, the highs will appear higher, and
   the lows less low.
7. Whenever you think about smoking during the next few days or the rest of
   your life, think: YIPPEE, I’M A NON-SMOKER!

## CHAPTER 41 A FINAL WARNING

Be warned: smokers who find it easy to stop can sometimes be **prone to
relapse**, because they think it will be easy to quit again. 

DO NOT FALL INTO THIS TRAP!!!

No matter how long you have been a non-smoker or how confident you are that you
could never get hooked; if you smoke again you will instantly become
re-addicted.

Make it a rule of life that you don’t smoke tobacco. No exceptions. Ever.
Period. **This is not a game**. There are some things in life that you don’t
mess around with, and this is one of them.

## CHAPTER 42 OVER TWENTY YEARS OF FEEDBACK

This attitude is beginning to change and today some of our most enthusiastic
supporters are frontline medical professionals who themselves work with
smokers.

‘Remember, you must never smoke another cigarette.’

‘I know you feel like that at the moment, but how will you feel six months on?’

If you do begin to feel uncomfortable, slow your breathing down and take a
couple of nice, big, deep breaths. Focus on the key thoughts: 
- **there is nothing to ‘give up’ apart from a life of fear, misery and
  slavery** 
- **every smoker is envious of you** as a non-smoker, because every smoker
  would rather be a non-smoker; 
- that the **little monster is dead** or already dying. 

If you go back to smoking you are guaranteeing a future of feeling panicky and
miserable. Is that how you want to go through the rest of your life? No one can
stop time. 

Every second that passes, the fear recedes. Enjoy your inevitable victory. 

If you want to shout, scream or cry then do so. These are all perfectly natural
ways to relieve tension. 

Remember you are not feeling this way because you stopped smoking, but because
you started in the first place.

You cannot and will not fail because your life and your future depend on your
success.

It is inevitable that you will think about smoking. It’s what you are thinking
that’s important. If you are thinking, ‘Oh, I’d love a cigarette,’ or ‘When
will I be free?’ you’ll have to use willpower not to smoke, which will likely
make you feel miserable. But if you are thinking, ‘YIPPEE! I am free!’ you’ll
be happy, and the more you think about it, the happier you’ll be.

Smokers are deprived of their health, their money, their self-respect, their
energy, their self-esteem and their freedom.

When those smokers see you so happy they’ll think you’re Superman. And, in
truth, you’ll feel a bit like him!

The Checklist If you follow these simple instructions, you cannot fail. 
1. **Make a solemn vow** that you will never, ever, smoke, chew, suck or
   otherwise consume anything that contains nicotine, and stick to that vow. 
2. Get this clear in your mind: **there is absolutely nothing to give up**. By
   that I don’t mean that you will be better off as a non-smoker (you’ve known
   that your entire smoking life); nor do I mean that the pleasure or benefit
   from smoking is not worth the expense and risk. What I mean is that there is
   absolutely no benefit to smoking whatsoever. It is like banging your head
   against a wall because it feels a bit better when you stop. 
3. There is **no such thing as a confirmed smoker**. You are just one of the
   millions who fell for this subtle trap. Like millions of ex-smokers who once
   thought they couldn’t escape, you have escaped. 
4. If you were to weigh up the pros and cons of smoking, the conclusion would
   always be the same, **to be a non-smoker and happy about it**. Having made
   what you know to be the correct decision, don’t ever make yourself miserable
   by doubting it. 
5. **Don’t try not to think about smoking or worry that you are** thinking
   about it too much. But whenever you do think about it—whether it’s today,
   tomorrow or the rest of your life—think, ‘YIPPEE! I’M A NON-SMOKER!’ 
6. **DO NOT use any form of substitute.** 
7. **DO NOT carry or keep any smoking materials.** 
8. **DO NOT avoid other smokers.** 
9. **DO NOT change your lifestyle in any way** purely because you’ve stopped
   smoking. If you follow the above instructions, you will soon experience the
   moment of revelation. But: 
0. **Don’t wait for that moment to come. Just get on with your life.** Enjoy
   the highs and cope with the lows. The moment will come, and when it does,
   it’s a moment of pure joy.

**Tobacco is the only legal product that if used precisely as the manufacturer
intended, kills you**.

1. **Keep this book safely in a place where you can easily refer to it.** Do
   not lose it, lend it out or give it away. It’s no bad thing to pick it up
   occasionally and read a couple of pages. It’ll keep you ‘in the zone’. This
   is your shortcut to attaining the right frame of mind about smoking. Keep it
   close at hand, in case you need it. Rather than lend it out (trust me—you’ll
   never get it back) gift copies to any friends who show an interest in it.
2. **If you ever find yourself envying a smoker, realize that they will be
   envious of you.** You are not being deprived. They are.
3. **Remember you did not enjoy being a smoker. That’s why you stopped.** You
   do enjoy being a non-smoker.
4. **Remember, there is no such thing as just one cigarette**.
5. **Never doubt your decision never to smoke again. You know it’s the correct
   decision**.
6. **If you have any difficulties contact your nearest Allen Carr’s EASYWAY
   center.** US office on 1 866 666 4299.

