
# How to Read More: The Simple System I’m Using to Read 30+ Books Per Year

by JAMES CLEAR https://jamesclear.com/read-more

Warren Buffett, the man commonly referred to as the greatest investor of the
20th century, was standing in front of 165 wide-eyed students from Columbia
University.

One of the students raised his hand and asked Buffett for his thoughts on the
best way to prepare for an investing career. After thinking for a moment,
Buffett pulled out a stack of papers and trade reports he had brought with him
and said, “Read 500 pages like this every day. That's how knowledge works. It
builds up, like compound interest. All of you can do it, but I guarantee not
many of you will do it.”

Buffett estimates that 80 percent of his working hours are spent reading or
thinking. It's enough to make you ask, “Am I reading enough books?”

When I asked myself that question recently, I realized that there were some
simple reasons I wasn't reading as much as I would like to, and I developed a
reasonable system that is helping me read more than 30 books per year.

Let me explain…

## How to Read More Books

If you know how to read, then reading books is relatively easy. You simply have
to make time to read. Easier said than done, of course.

When I looked at my own reading habits, I realized that my reading habits were
mostly reactive, not proactive. If an interesting link flashed across my screen
on Facebook or Twitter, then I would read it as a reaction. I wasn't
proactively making time to read books each day. I was simply reading
interesting ideas that were pushed in front of me.

As a result, most of my reading was done online. Now, there are plenty of
excellent articles on the web, but generally speaking, the quality of good
books is better. Books typically have better writing (more tightly edited) and
higher quality information (better fact-checking and more extensive research).
From a learning perspective, it's probably a better use of my time to read
books than to read online content.

So, I had to figure out a strategy that would allow me to read more books
without letting typical distractions get in the way.

How do you that?

## 20 Pages Per Day

Here's the only pattern I've been able to stick with consistently:

Read 20 pages to start the day.

I usually wake up, drink a glass of water, write down 3 things I'm grateful
for, and read 20 pages of a book. For the last 10 weeks, I have followed this
new habit. As of today, I'm 100 pages into my 7th book. At that pace (7 books
per 10 weeks) I'll read about 36 books in the next year. Not bad.

Here's why I think this pattern works: 20 pages is small enough that it's not
intimidating. Most people can finish reading 20 pages within 30 minutes. And if
you do it first thing in the morning, then the urgencies of the day don't get
in the way.

Finally, 20 pages seems small but adds up fast. It's a great average speed.

If time allows, I'll read more at other times as well. After the research I did
for my article on how to get better sleep, I have added reading to my “prepare
for bed” routine as well. But regardless of what happens during the rest of the
day, I still get my 20 pages in each morning.  

## The First Hour

How do you spend the first hour of your day?

Most people spend it getting dressed, getting ready, and rushing out the door.
What if that time was spent making yourself a better person? What if you woke
up an hour before you needed to each day and worked on yourself? How much
better would you be at work, in your relationships, and as a person?

That's essentially what this reading strategy is asking you to do. Before you
move on to the normal bustle of the day, invest in yourself. Before your life
turns into a whirlwind of activity, read a book that will make you better. As
with most habits that can greatly impact your life, this will never feel
urgent, but it is important.  

20 pages per day. That's all you need.  

## Read Next

Looking for good books to read? I created a public reading list where you can
see all of my book recommendations across a wide range of categories. Here are
a few of the best books to start with…

- 25 Best-Selling Books of All-Time
- 10 Best Nonfiction Books
- 10 Best Fiction Books

If you want practical ideas for creating more good habits (like reading!),
check out my book Atomic Habits, which will show you how small changes in
habits can lead to remarkable results.

Happy reading!
