# Search Inside Yourself Course
w/ Lori Schwanbeck 

## 2018-10-30 Mindfulness 

Exercise: In Pairs
- What do you love about your work?
- What are some of your biggest challenges?

Exercise: few minutes guided meditation
- notice the breath
- bodyscan
- mental state

Mindful Listening
- How was the exercise?
- What would make this a successful program for you?
- w/ Jon Mountjoy

- 47% avg time spent mind-wandering
- 70% leaders report regularly unable to be attentive in meetings
- 2%  people regularly make time to enhance personal productivitiy

`Emotional Intelligence`: The ability to monitor one's own and others' feeling
and emotions, to discriminate among them and to use this info to guide one's
thinking and actions

Using Daniel Goleman's Emotional Intelligence framework
- self awareness
- self management
- motivation
- empathy
- social skills

Benefits
- Outstanding Leadership: ability to influence family, coworkers, barista
- High Performance
- Happiness; 4 factors
  - resilience
  - outlook
  - attention
  - generosity

SIY = Emotional Intelligence + Neuroscience + Mindfulness

Roadmap for this course:
- mindfulness
- self awareness
- self management
- motivation
- empathy
- leadership

Roadmap: 28 day challenge
- 6 live sessions
- 28 day challenge
- capstone webinar & post-program survey

Autopilot vs Aware

Autopilot traits
- attention is in the past or future
- distrated
- reactive or judgmental
- Act based on habit patterns and assumptions

Micropractice: Three breaths
- attention to breath
- relax body
- ask: what's important now?

Awareness of:
- body
- surroundings
- mind

Practicce: attentional blink

Attention vs Meta-attention

Focusted Attention Process: 
- follow breath
- distraction
- notice distraction
- reorientation of attentin
- repeat cycle

Mindful listening
- what did you notice?
- how are you feeling?

Micropractice: Minute to arrive
- A quiet moment to fully arrive before starting a meeting

Homework:
- practice 1 minute of focused attention
- Begin one meal with 3 mindful bites (or any other activity e.g. brushing teeth)
- Practice mindful listening

## 2018-10-31 Day 1 Homework

The first video we saw today by Dan Harris, author of “10% Happier,” which
talks about how he came to discover the benefits of mindfulness.  
[Dan Harris: Hack Your Brain’s Default Node with Meditation](https://youtu.be/FAcTIrA2Qhk)

The second video below features Daniel Goleman, author of “Emotional
Intelligence,” which covers some information about how the emotional center of
our brains plays a part in decision making. We will be discussing this video
during tomorrow's session . 
[Dan Goleman: Neuroscience of Emotions and Decision Making](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IQX-w87J3Vw)

The third video is by Jon Kabat Zinn on how Mindfulness helps us to relate to
our thoughts.  We will be discussing this video during tomorrow's session as
well.  
[Jon Kabat Zinn:  Mindfulness Dissolves Thoughts](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LvLRheIPY90)

Here are the recommended practices we talked about at the end of today’s program. 

Try out one dedicated practice and one integrated practice today and we’ll talk
about what that was like for you tomorrow morning!

1. Sitting Practice 1-minute (aka "Dedicated Practice):

Focused Attention Practice:  Practice 1-minute of focused attention practice.
Start by finding a quiet place to sit.  With your eyes closed or slightly open,
taking one minute to simply focus on your breath.  You can do this by paying
attention to the feeling of air as it passes through your nostrils, or also by
paying attention to the rise and fall of your abdomen as you breathe.  You can
breathe normally for this practice.  Just sit and observe.

2. Integrated Practice: Mindful Listening -or- 3 Mindful Bites

Mindful Listening Practice: Use mindful listening in a conversation that you
have today either with a coworker, friend, or family member.  To practice, you
can either let the other person know that you are going to practice mindful
listening, or you can do it in “stealth” mode by simply putting your full
attention on the other person when they are talking, and perhaps taking a
moment to consider your response before immediately responding.

OR ...

Begin one meal with 3 mindful bites: At a meal today, try starting by taking 3
mindful bites. Pay attention to how you pick up the food, to your first bite,
to the flavors and how the food feels in your mouth as you chew and swallow.
How does it change your experience of the food? 

## 2018-10-31 Self Awareness

Self Awareness => Emotional Awareness

Img: Emotions in the Body
- heatmap of body under different emotions

Decisions are made in both:
- Amygdala: conntected to limbic system (emotions)
- Prefontal Cortex: rational thinking, executive function

Existential (I Am) vs Experiential (I Am Experiencing)

Exercise: Bodyscan

Micropractice: Head, body, Heart Check-in
- Head: thoughts
- Body: emotions, intuition 
- Heart: values, intentions

Exercise: Journaling
- things that annoy me are...
- my challenges are...
- things that bring me alive are...

Breakout: How was the experience today?

## 2018-11-01 Day 2 Homework

1. Watch Video ["Just Breathe"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RVA2N6tX2cg)

2. Meditation Practice: Either Guided Body Scan or Head, Gut, Heart practice
- Body Scan Meditation:  Try this [3-minute guided Body Scan
  meditation.](https://soundcloud.com/searchinsideyourself/w2-d11_body-scan/s-PpJHK)

Head, Gut, Heart practice: Take a few moments to do the 3 Centers Practice.
Starting with one breath checking in with what you’re noticing in your Head,
followed by a breath checking in with what you’re noticing in your gut, and
finally the last breath checking in with your heart.

3. Self-Awareness Journaling:  Pick at least 2 journaling prompts from below.
   Write for 3 minutes for each question.  Try using an open writing style,
   meaning just keep writing, even if you don’t know what to say.  Try not to
   edit yourself while writing.  Simply start a timer and write for 3 minutes.  

After you’ve completed your journaling, take a moment to reread what you wrote.
What do you notice?  Are there any similarities or contradictions?  What
insights have you gained in reflecting on these topics?

- In this moment, I am aware that … 
- I feel happiest when …
- If I knew I could not fail I would …
- What matters most to me in my life right now is ...

And, of course, you are welcome to continue practicing Mindful Listening,
Mindful Bites, and an attention training practice! 

## 2018-11-01 Self Management

It's not:
- avoiding
- denying
- suppressing

How to Respond to Triggers

Video: Neuroanatomical Model of Emotional Reactivity and Regulation

**SBNRR**: Stop, Breath, Notice, Reflect, Respond

Exercise: Mindful Conversation
- A talks, B listens
- B says: "What I heard you say is..." 
- then A gives feedback
- B responds until A is satisfied
- switch roles

prompts for exercise ^
- how are you feeling right now?
- what did you experience during the sitting exercise
- OR... anything else you  want

Emotional Management Strategies
- Attention
- Reframing
- Acceptance

Self Compassion requires:
- Mindfulness (Notice in SBNRR)
- Common Humanity
- Self Kindness

Practice: Self Compassion Journaling
- Imagine writing a letter to yourself from the perspective of a close friend or mentor
- They know you well, understand you, want what's best for you
- What would they say to you about the challenges and opportunities you are facing

Practice: Generous Listening
- focus on the speaker
- have a conversation and ask questions
- prompts
  - what did you notice in the previous journaling exercise
  - how do you feel about challenges and opportunities now

Micropractice: Acceptance
- "Breathing in I do my best;"
- "Breathing out I let go of the rest"

## 2018-11-01 Day 3 Homework

1. Practice sitting for 3 minutes each day: either an open awareness or focused
   attention practice (or try some of the attached guided meditations).

2. Self Compassion meditation: choose one of self-compassion researcher Kristin
   Neff’s guided meditations http://self-compassion.org/category/exercises/

3. Practice SBNRR: If you are fortunate enough to be triggered sometime in the
   next few days, use that opportunity to practice SBNRR (Stop, Breathe,
   Notice, Reflect, & Respond).  Then, afterward, take a few moments to reflect
   on how that went for you.  Did it help you to engage with the situation in a
   new way?  What was it like to notice that a trigger was happening and to
   approach it with more purpose and intention?   
