# You Procrastinate Because Of Emotions, Not Laziness. Regulate Them To Stop Procrastinating!

[Source: Cognition
Today](https://cognitiontoday.com/2019/05/you-procrastinate-because-of-emotions-not-laziness-regulate-them-to-stop-procrastinating/)

There are two trains of thought – One leads to procrastination and one leads to
motivation. And somewhere in between, there is a junction called anxiety.

Let’s first look at the procrastination train of thought (at least that’s going
somewhere, amirite?). People often think procrastination is about time
management, laziness, or a weak will but that is not the best way to understand
procrastination.

According to research, [poor emotional regulation and a failure of
self-regulation](http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/91793/1/Compass%20Paper%20revision%20FINAL.pdf)
cause people to procrastinate. We procrastinate because some tasks put us in a
lousy mood and we want to repair that mood to feel better.

Ok, time is not entirely irrelevant when it comes to procrastination. After
all, there are deadlines. But, it really is more about emotion/mood repair
mechanisms in the [context of
time](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0092656606000833)
– specifically, the near future. Roy Baumeister, an influential psychologist,
says that procrastination is a [“self-defeating behavior pattern marked by
short-term benefits and long-term
costs.”](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/e/9781315175775/chapters/10.4324/9781315175775-9)

It’s not intuitive at first but to overcome procrastination, we need to address
emotions and thoughts about the outcome of completing certain tasks.  

> People procrastinate or avoid aversive tasks to improve their short-term mood
> at the cost of long-term goals.

Let’s take a small moderately detailed detour. What does science really say
about procrastination?

For all practical purposes, we will define procrastination as the intentional
and voluntary delay of an intended activity even if the delay creates negative
consequences. And, we will label the ‘stuff’ done while procrastinating as
aversion activities.

Disclaimer: Procrastination can be a symptom in many psychological &
neurological disorders. This post doesn’t look at the root cause of those
disorders. For that, please consult a therapist.

## Why do people procrastinate?

[In a 2016 paper
](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1041608016302187)
published using the randomized control trial framework, researchers reported
that the ability to deal with aversive emotions and modifying them reduced
procrastination. The researchers extended their experiments to see if training
people on emotional regulation reduced procrastination. Guess what?? It did!

But what exactly is emotional regulation?

[Emotional
regulation](https://econtent.hogrefe.com/doi/full/10.1024/1661-4747.56.2.141)
describes a person’s ability to effectively manage, control, and deal with
emotions, emotional experiences, and emotional thoughts. There are multiple
mechanisms people use in their daily life to regulate emotions: Taking breaks,
sleeping, talking with friends, binge-watching, smoking, self-harm, picking
fights, sarcasm, talking with others, etc. Some emotion regulation strategies
are healthy (like taking breaks) and some are unhealthy (like picking fights).

[Here is a detailed how-to guide on using evidence-based emotional regulation
techniques
](https://cognitiontoday.com/2019/07/7-proven-and-practical-emotional-regulation-skills-techniques-how-to/).

For the sake of generalization, you can extend this concept to include a broad
range of cognitive strategies such as modifying, adapting, utilizing,
controlling, and resolving emotions. We can broadly call this emotional
self-regulation.

Related: You might find [this mental technique
](https://cognitiontoday.com/2018/06/how-to-remain-calm-reducing-stress-anxiousness-and-social-anxiety/)
to reduce social anxiety and nervousness useful. It uses language to regulate
emotions.

[A paper based on experience sampling
](https://search.proquest.com/openview/7e3502c28fb06c9517ccbe6e08fd637e/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=1819046)
of undergraduate students (analyzing thoughts, emotions, behaviors, etc. with
qualitative data) revealed that students procrastinate stressful and unpleasant
tasks. When procrastinating, they engage in more pleasant behaviors. One
important thing to note here is that any task can be considered stressful and
unpleasant based on a few personal factors.

Basic tasks can be stressful and unpleasant when a person is depressed or
suffers from anxiety disorders. Low self-worth, low self-esteem, low confidence
can mediate this and make virtually anything unpleasant. In fact, there are
self-sabotaging behaviors which manifest as procrastination. For example, a
person demonstrating low self-worth and a sense of deserving unpleasant
feelings could delay work and sabotage it to prove that feeling correct.

[Research on aspects of mental health
](https://search.proquest.com/openview/2b0a5945bd9f95970fe3a7610cd088af/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=28723)
such as depression, anxiety, and finer aspects like poor confidence in
abilities, worrying, negative thinking, perfectionism, ADHD, etc. predict
procrastination like behaviors. 

[Some part of your procrastination
](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03069885.2014.896454) may be due
to mental health problems. Please seek professional help if you feel like you
are suffering from mental health issues.

Mildly demanding tasks can become stressful if a person overthinks. One could
overthink as a result of cognitive biases, obsessive and intrusive thoughts,
anxiety, etc. and [overcoming thinking errors
](https://cognitiontoday.com/2018/03/8-powerful-ways-to-overcome-thinking-errors-and-cognitive-biases/)
might help in having a clearer mental picture.  

[Curious?: Simplifying Depression: A Serious Mental Health Issue
](https://cognitiontoday.com/2019/03/simplifying-depression-a-serious-mental-health-issue/)

[Research shows that people, when upset, tend to act on existing impulses to make themselves feel better. ](https://psycnet.apa.org/buy/2000-14236-004) However, when people believe that their bad mood is unchangeable, they do not engage in frivolous procrastination or acting on other impulses to engage in other activities (which lead to procrastination, at times). This may happen because believing that one’s mood is unchangeable has a hidden assumption: Nothing can be done to make it better. So why do it?

Negative repetitive thoughts which are related to procrastination are often
present in this complex cluster of perceived anxiety. They even have a special
name – procrastinatory cognitions. These are direct destructive thoughts about
procrastination and metacognitions such as worrying about procrastination
itself. 

[Researchers have reported that procrastinatory cognitions are not compatible
with healthy emotional self-regulation
](https://psycnet.apa.org/buy/2000-14236-004) and mediate the link between
procrastination and the negative affect cluster: anxiety, stress & negative
emotions.

Meta-cognition (thoughts about thoughts) related to procrastination,
depression, and cognitive attentional syndrome (negative thought patterns,
worrying, rumination, coping tricks which backfire) independently [predict
unintentional procrastination
](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165032716315051).  

> Procrastination is not a time management problem. It is an emotion regulation problem - we delay activities which might make us feel not-so-good.

## The process of procrastination

There is a neat process which describes procrastination (and no, it’s not the
oversold habit loop). It is based on what researchers call the [CAPS construct
](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1464-0597.00021).  CAPS
stands for Cognitive-Affective Personality System. Here is the model; it’s
pretty self-explanatory.  

Model proposed by Wendelien Van Eerde, Eindhoven University of Technology

![CAPS](img/CAPS.png)

The CAPS construct has 5 key factors which are involved in procrastination
1. Encodings (cognitive representations of information)
2. Competency & Self-regulation planning
3. Goals & Values
4. Expectancies & Beliefs
5. Affect (emotions, mood)

This process is quite holistic because it looks at a person’s traits, attitude,
skill, personality, values, self-knowledge, environment, rewards, time
pressure, etc.

In short, we often procrastinate because of perceived anxiety, stress, and poor
emotional regulation about the completion of a task. If you are procrastinating
reading study material, it’s probably related to some perceived anxiety based
on the outcome of studying. Perhaps, if you start studying, you’ll realize you
don’t know anything. Or maybe you’ll feel that you are not smart enough to even
begin addressing the study material.

**Perceived anxieties make us feel ‘not so good.’**

The feeling that you get about the outcome of doing a task is the core cause of
procrastination. It could be a belief about yourself, it could be based on
previous experiences, or it could be an amplified version of something small.
You’d know best.

After the perceived anxiety/negative thought kills our buzz, we end up doing an
aversion activity like going out with friends or watching YouTube or Netflix.
**The aversion activity is a mechanism to avoid or delay the anxiety and repair
the short-term negative mood**. Think about it. Most of us end up doing
something more pleasurable because the procrastinated task spoiled our mood in
the first place. Btw, even boredom can be a powerful negative emotion.

This, of course, is a very simplistic picture. Motivation complicates things.

## The opposing force of motivation

Let’s now look at the motivation train of thought. The fact that there are
consequences for procrastinating is a source of anxiety and stress in itself.
This could motivate you to not procrastinate in the first place. But that
doesn’t always happen. The motivation could stay in the background or it could
even push you toward your goal. However, the anxiety remains until it is dealt
with.

Once the anxiety builds up, it hits you in many forms:
suddenly-one-night-I-got-the-mental-strength-to-get-up-and-do-it is one form in
which it hits you.

But here is the thing, the brain CAN handle and maintain 2 conflicting thoughts
and mental sets at the same. It’s called cognitive dissonance and research
shows that the dissonance has broad applications for guiding behavior and
gaining psychological comfort. Cognitive dissonance leads to psychological
discomfort and that might amplify the double whammy… which… I will talk about
in a few seconds.

[Cognitive dissonance isn’t a sob story
](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0963721414566449). It can
facilitate effective behaviors and actions. Just to highlight the complex
nature of motivation… The discomfort arising from dissonance might drive you to
take some action because in most cases, the conflict needs to be resolved for
you to feel better. While it might not be that obvious (I hope many disagree),
feeling better is something humans like.  I am so stressed that relaxing makes
me more stressed because I am not working on what's making me stressed

![stressed](img/stressed.jpeg)

Remember I said that there is a junction called anxiety? If you are at that
junction, you’ll receive a double whammy attack from anxiety – one from your
motivation, and one from your procrastination.  

[Curious?: Understanding the level of Serotonin and Dopamine in a depressed
person's brain
](https://cognitiontoday.com/2018/11/understanding-the-level-of-serotonin-and-dopamine-in-a-depressed-persons-brain/)

At this junction, you can experience anxiety from both trains of thought and it
bleeds into your mental space. This could get a lot worse because [anxiety is
notorious as a bed-time feeder
](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3181635/). To make matters even
worse, if you have a habit of ruminating stressful thoughts about work,
productivity, ambitions, etc.  before bedtime, it could [worsen your sleep
](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/15402002.2015.1083022). Night
time negative repetitive thinking is a huge problem in itself.

An idle mind before sleeping is a hotspot for this anxiety junction to get
overwhelming. It kills your sleep, makes you tired, and gives you zero clarity
on how to continue the journey toward successful procrastination or successful
avoidance of procrastination.

Wait… did I say ‘toward successful procrastination’?

Yes, because, we don’t often just procrastinate. The story would be simple if
we just delayed tasks; the anxiety would be relatively less intense. We
procrastinate and are conflicted by the polar opposite drive to complete the
procrastinated task – via intrinsic motivation, rewards, validation,
acknowledgment, happiness, satisfaction, pride, honor, and glory. Chronic
procrastinators know this all too well.  

> Procrastination + Motivation = Conflict + Action

So what do these insights tell us about overcoming or, at least, reducing
procrastination? Can we really do anything about it?

Fortunately, there is good news. The research is vast and consistent enough to
give us actionable tips to overcome procrastination. Here are some solutions
based on the recommendations proposed by researchers. I’ve repackaged some
insights for practical use.

## 10 Scientific solutions for overcoming procrastination

### 1. Address the perceived anxiety about the completion of a task. 

You know it’s there but it might not be in awareness. So you might have to dig
and address your feelings first. In the meanwhile, [you can use these
techniques to manage negative thoughts
](https://cognitiontoday.com/2019/09/stop-negative-thoughts-with-cognitive-defusion-cognitive-restructuring-techniques/).
Combine this anxiety-exploration with a breakdown of tasks. If going to the gym
is something which causes anxiety, begin by assessing that anxiety for the
smallest steps you need to take – wearing gym shoes, carrying a sweat-napkin,
etc. Take one tiny step at a time because the tinier the step feels, the
smaller the emotions around it become.

### 2. It might help if you can bring the avoided/procrastinated task closer to you and distance the aversion activities you are habituated with. 

You can do this by assigning more value/meaning to the avoided task and
trivialize the aversion activity. If that’s not enough, modify your environment
to have easier access to completing your tasks. For example, if you
procrastinate paying bills in spite of having money, make sure you are logged
into paying portals and the process of paying is easy. Behaviors like not
remembering a password or account details are unnecessary hindrances. The
construal level theory of psychological distance predicts (and [research
verifies
](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02240.x)) that
thinking about a task in more concrete terms and bringing it closer to yourself
in time (now vs. future) can decrease the chances of procrastination. Abstract
& vague goals/rewards won’t always work, make them real and tangible. That’ll
allow your brain to accept the goals and rewards more readily.

### 3. Before sleeping, relaxing (via stretching, yoga, breathing exercise, meditation, progressive muscle relaxation, etc.) can help your brain reboot.

After rebooting, you can plan and strategize how you’ll go about the task the
next morning. Once you have assured yourself that the anxiety was not needed
and you gain the confidence in beginning the task (however, challenging),
procrastination will stop destroying your sleep.

4. If possible, walk yourself through the task and ready your mind. 

You can make a To-Do List, a roadmap, a Not-To-Do list, etc. There are many
other factors like your environment, skill, resources, functional fixedness,
etc.  which determine how productive you are. Here is an [exhaustive guide on
improving productivity
](https://cognitiontoday.com/2018/10/how-to-increase-productivity-the-ultimate-psychological-guide/).
While you do these activities, let your emotions surface/re-surface. It’s
important for you to be aware of your emotions. The goal of planning, here, is
not to organize work. It is to address the emotions associated with the tasks.
Mentally going over activities can allow some additional introspection which
can give you some personal insight into your own mood and emotional thoughts.  

[Curious?: 45 common symptoms of mental illness - signs of depression and
anxiety
](https://cognitiontoday.com/2018/01/45-symptoms-of-mental-illness-signs-of-depression-and-anxiety/)

### 5. Readying yourself to sleep properly is a separate but related activity you’ll need to employ. 

This must go hand in hand with addressing the perceived anxiety and gaining
emotional clarity. [This might help you to sleep better
](https://cognitiontoday.com/2018/07/7-effective-methods-to-fall-asleep-faster-and-improve-the-quality-of-sleep/)

### 6. Depending on the severity of your procrastination and anxiety, you might need to put in some additional effort to cultivate new habits. 

Here is a [pro-productivity anti-procrastination habit routine
](https://cognitiontoday.com/2017/08/overcoming-procrastination-with-a-habit-changing-psychological-method/)
you can use if you are a chronic procrastinator and want to cultivate new
healthy habits.

### 7. Use the emotional self-regulation strategy recommended in Berking and Whitley’s book which verifiably decreases procrastination:

- Choose the task you procrastinate.
- Bring aversive and negative emotions & thoughts associated with the task into
  awareness.
- Instruct yourself to tolerate those negative emotions – boredom, fear of
  failure, fear of judgment, feelings of incompetence, etc.
- Address those emotions by regulating your emotions in a structured manner.
- Begin with allowing those emotions to exist. Do not suppress them. Then tell
  yourself that you are strong, tough, and resilient. 
- Finally, ascribe more emotional meaning to the task and emotionally commit to
  that task.

### 8. [Being mindful can do some damage control](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10942-012-0151-y) for regular procrastinators 

By improving their wellbeing and health over and above [reducing their tendency
to procrastinate
](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0191886918306500?via%3Dihub). 

Mindfulness might help with emotional regulation or it might even reduce the
impact of stress due to procrastination. Mindfulness, in its many forms,
[promotes self-regulation
](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3480633/) via cognitive,
behavioral, and emotional pathways.

### 9. Forgive yourself for the times you’ve procrastinated 

... a specific task in the past and suffered through guilt, stress, and
anxiety. According to a paper which gives us this [incredibly easy strategy,
self-forgiveness reduces negative emotions about oneself
](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0191886910000474), and
that reduces the likelihood of procrastinating the same activity again. So if
you procrastinate a medical appointment once, forgive yourself for delaying it.
The second time might not occur.  Self-forgiveness can also be expanded into
self-compassion which helps with self-regulation by countering the depletion of
mental resources to cope with stress.

### 10. Use the popular Pomodoro Technique 

to gain control over your tasks and relieve the pressure from some associated
anxiety. The Pomodoro Technique is a structured time management technique which
allows users to break tasks into 20-25 minute chunks. This changes the concept
of time from ‘how much time is needed’ to ‘what I can accomplish in 20
minutes’. This cognitive change facilitates control and possibly, increases
motivation. Although popular, not much research has gone into exploring the
effectiveness of this technique on stopping procrastination. However, a
preliminary report shows that there is some value in using it. Follow the next
steps to implement the Pomodoro technique:

- Pick a timer (or an app), Set it to 20 or 25 minutes
- Spend 20-25 minutes on a task
- Once the timer rings, stop.
- Take a break of 5 minutes (cycle 1)
- Return to another 20-25 minutes on a series of tasks
- Take a break of 5 minutes (cycle 2)
- After 4 cycles, take a longer break

Baby steps, right? Hope these insights help you reduce procrastination,
procrastinatory cognitions, gain emotional clarity, and learn a ridiculously
valuable life skill called emotion regulation!

Remember – You can overcome procrastination by regulating your emotions about
your work.

P.S. There are many ways in which procrastination sustains itself as a habit.
For example, feeling the success of completing a task, in spite of putting it
off until the 11th hour, can be interpreted as a reward. You could get
conditioned to this reward and feel nothing was lost to procrastination. Or,
the satisfaction of completion is overwhelming and you like it. These feelings
can have a strong biological component via classical and operant conditioning.
The brain may associate the increasing tension of procrastination with success,
if you are successful. That association underlies a habit or a rigid tendency.
